 
 
Potential utilization of Battery Energy 
Storage Systems (BESS) in the major 
European electricity markets  
Yu Hu 1*,  Miguel Armada 2, María Jesús Sánchez 2 
1 Simulyde S.L., Madrid, Spain. 
2 Escuela Técnica Superior Ingenieros Industriales, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 
Abstract 
 
Given the declining cost of battery technology in the last decade, nowadays BESS becomes 
a more attractive solution in electrical power systems. The objective of this work is to 
analyze the potential utilization of BESS in the major European electricity ma rkets. A 
general payoff model for BESS operation is proposed to correctly address  the operational 
flexibility of battery systems. Utilization factors such as potentially profitable utilization 
time and rate are calculated for common applications including energy arbitrage and 
frequency support services using real market information. The result shows that under the 
current empirical  estimation of the battery cost and lifetime, BESS is not  feasible for 
energy arbitrage in most of the European electricity markets. However, BESS shows clearly 
and significantly higher potential i n providing frequency support  services. The result 
suggests that, when the frequency containment reserve is remunerable,  the potentially 
profitable utilization of BESS has become already accretive in most of the European 
countries. For example from January to September  2021, the potentially profitable 
utilization rate has reached almost 100% for the FCR -N service in the Danish m arket. 
Comparing the regional electricity markets in Europe, BESS has shown significant 
potential in becoming a feasible solution in Central Western Europe and parts of Northern 
Europe by providing frequency regulation services. Meanwhile, in the British Isles and 
some other isla nded local markets, a remarkable  level of scarcity of flexibility has been 
revealed by the investigation , and the potential of BESS would also be considerably 
encouraging. 
Keywords 
Battery Energy Storage Systems; European electricity markets; Potentially profitable 
utilization; Energy arbitrage; Frequency containment reserve. 
 
                                                           
1 Corresponding author. Tel: +34-917395257; Email: yu.hu@invesyde.com  

 
 
Highlights 
 
 A general payoff model is proposed to address the operational flexibility of battery 
systems  
 Potential utilization of battery systems are evaluated using utilization factors 
 Battery systems are not feasible for energy arbitrage in the current European 
electricity markets 
 Potential utilization of battery systems is promising in Europe for frequency 
regulation services 
  

 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Nowadays, intense concern about climate change is increasing among policy -makers and 
other stakeholders  in many major European economies. In July 2021, the European 
Commission unveiled a set of legislative proposals aimed at achieving carbon neutrality by 
2050, while reducing emissions by 55% by 2030  from the 1990 level  as an intermediate 
target [1]. And in the United Kingdom (UK), the  government published , in November 
2020, a 10 Point Plan to support the economy and employment market during the transition 
process to net-zero emission by 2050 [2]. 
 
As a replacement of fossil fuels  fired power plants , expanding and integrating renewable 
energy capacity is one of the most essential actions in these ambitious plans. In the new 
proposal by the European Commission  [3], the binding target for the share of renewable s 
increased to 40%  by 2030, 8% higher than the existing target of 32% established in the 
2018 directive. And in the UK, the target for offshore wind power capacity is set at 40GW 
by 2030, three times higher than the current installed capacity in 2020 [2].  
 
The flexibility issues would  arise and become crucial with higher penetration of 
intermittent renewable energy sources in the energy mix. Given the fact that a great share of 
dispatchable generation capacity based on fossil fuel s would be replaced by renewable 
energy, energy storage , as an alternative flexibility provider,  is considered as a critical 
resource to achieve the sustainability goals for the future energy system  [4]. Among all the 
energy storage technologies, b attery technologies, especially the Li -ion battery, have 
experienced considerable cost reduction i n the last years. Nowadays,  Battery Energy 
Storage System s (BESS) becomes more attractive in providing flexibility with 
decentralized and distributed  solutions. According to Hu et al.  [5], although BESS might 
not be completely economically feasible in some deregulated electricity markets such as the 
Spanish one, the potential utilization  for BESS is clearly higher  in countries where higher 
flexibility is demanded. At the same time, the potential application of BESS would be more 
promising in ancillary services than energy-based applications such as energy arbitrage. 
 
The objective of this work is to review the current market applications  and analyze the  
potential utilization of BESS in the major European electricity markets. In order to evaluate 
the potential utilization , a general model  for BESS  operation in electricity markets is 
proposed to correctly address the operational flexibility of battery systems. And utilization 
analysis is applied in the major European electricity market s using the concept “potentially 
profitable utilization time” [5]. Since the battery installation cost compared with the limited 
lifetime of the battery itself remains as the main barrier for feasible BESS applications, the 
potential changes in BESS utilization emerging from the battery cost reduction are also 
analyzed, which provides essential information for future scenarios. 
 
This paper contributes to the knowledge of the BESS operation under real deregulated 
electricity markets with the proposed general BESS payoff model. At the same time, by 

 
 
addressing the potential decline of battery cost as future scenarios, and comparing the result 
across different regional markets with different applications , this study provides a general 
overview of future potential utilization for battery systems in the major regional European 
electricity markets. The results of this study also contribute to the awareness of flexibility 
provided by BESS  in electricity markets , which would provide essential information for 
market participants such as  system/market operators, policy-makers, investors, and project 
developers.  
 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows . Section 2 provides a general review 
related to the current electricity market design in European countries. Section 3 summarizes 
the current situation for BESS in Europe and common applications for BESS as a flexibility 
provider in the state of the art . Section 4 presents the proposed  BESS operation model and 
the potential  utilization analysis  of BESS  in the major European electricity markets. 
Finally, Section 5 discusses the related issues and presents the main conclusions of this 
paper. 
2. Electricity markets in European countries 
 
2.1. Market structure and market integration 
 
The electricity market liberalization in Europe was initiated in 1996 with the enactment of 
the first European Directive concerning the liberalization of the electricity market  [6]. 
During the market liberalization process of its member countries , the European Union (EU) 
has also adopted several regulations to achieve a single internal electricity market ensuring 
secure and affordable energy supplies  [7]. According to Bunn and Gianfreda [8], the level 
of integration across the different regional  and national electricity markets has been 
significantly improved in the last decades.  
 
Currently, according to the European Network of Transmission System Operators 
(ENTSO-E), the electricity market in European countries  is structured into several 
individual markets: the forward market, the day -ahead market, the intraday market, the 
ancillary services market, and the imbalance settlement [9].  
 
In the forward market, market participants trade mid -long term products or electricity 
derivatives to hedge the risks and uncertainties in the day -ahead market. According to the 
European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER)  and Council of 
European Energy Regulators (CEER) , the liquidity of the forward market s in European 
countries diverges significantly : bidding zones such as FR ( France), DE-AT-LU 
(Germany/Austria/Luxembourg, and the bidding zone has become  DE-LU since October 
2018), and GB (Great Britain) are with the highest level of liquidity , however, the forward 
market liquidity in other large bidding zones such as Spain and Poland are much lower  
[10]. 
 

 
 
The day-ahead market is the major market where power delivery commitments are settled 
between power producers and consumers for the next 24 hours. The market clear prices in 
this market are normally considered as the most important  reference for energy prices.  In 
the EU, the Single Day -ahead Coupling (SDAC) initiative has been established to create a 
single pan European cross zonal day -ahead electrici ty market  [11]. Currently, the PCR 
EUPHEMIA algorithm (acronym of Price Coupling of Regions and Pan-European Hybrid 
Electricity Market Integration Algorithm)  has been commonly adopted in Europe to 
calculate electricity prices and to allocate cross-border transmission capacity [12]. 
 
When the  day-ahead market  is closed , market participants may make short -term 
adjustments in the intraday markets. In general, intraday markets are organized as collective 
auctions or  based on  continuous trading. Several European countries have  initialized the 
Cross-Border Intraday (XBID) project to integrate the national intraday markets. Currently, 
14 countries have participated in this project, including , Austria, Belgium, Denmark, 
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, the Netherlands, Portugal , 
Spain, and Sweden. 
 
In the ancillary services market, also referred to as the balancing market, service providers 
such as power generators, demand response facilities, and BESS may  offer ancillary 
services to the system operator and be remunerated if the offer is accepted and the services 
are correctly provided . Meanwhile, during the imbalance settlement process,  balance 
responsible parties such as electricity  producers, consumers are financially  responsible for 
the imbalances of their portfolios [9].  
 
Ancillary services are a set o f services related to the security and reliability  of a power 
system [13], which include frequency control, voltage support, black start services, 
automatic islanding, etc [14]. In this work, we focus on  frequency control services since a 
high level of flexibility in active power  (or real power) is required in these services , which 
are ideal for BESS installations.  
 
In order to maintain a stable system frequency, the ancillary services for frequency control 
in Europe are generally organized in the following levels: The Frequency Containment 
Reserve (FCR), the automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve  (aFRR), manual Frequency 
Restoration Reserve (mFRR), and Replacement Reserves (RR). 
 
The FCR, also commonly known as primary control [15], aims at “the operational 
reliability of the power system of the synchronous area and stabilizes the system frequency 
at a stationary value after a disturbance or incident in the time -frame of seconds, but 
without restoring the system frequency and the po wer exchanges to their reference values.” 
The common activation time for the FCR is typically within 30 seconds. The EU has 
established a project named “FCR Cooperation ” to integrate the market of FCR 
procurement. And until October 2021  eight countries  (Austria, Belgium, Slovenia, 
Germany, Switzerland, Western Denmark , France and the Netherlands ) have joined the 
project.  
 
The aFRR (also known as the secondary reserve) and the mFRR (also known as the tertiary 
reserve) will be activated if the frequency deviation lasts. For example, according to 

 
 
ENTSO-E [9] , the automatic  activation time for aFRR is between 30 seconds to 15 
minutes, and for the mFRR, the activation could be semi-automatic or manually controlled 
and the time limitation is within 15 minutes. In other words, if the frequency deviation lasts 
for more than 30 seconds, the aFRR service is activated to replace the FCR. The same, for 
frequency deviations which are more than 15 minutes, the mFRR is activated to replace the 
aFRR. 
 
The service of RR exists only in some of the European countries . Similar to the aFRR and 
mFRR, the RR is designed for the replacement of the activated aFRR and/or mFRR 
services, and the required activation time is more than 15 minutes [9].  
 
Platforms such as PICASSO (Platform for the International Coordination of Automated 
Frequency Restoration and Stable System Operation), MARI (Manually Activated Reserves 
Initiative), and TERRE (Trans-European Replacement Reserves Exchange) have been 
implemented to create a n integrated p latform for  the aFRR, the mFRR, and the RR  
respectively. Nevertheless , at the moment  the market design for the services mentioned 
above in each country remains dissimilar and uncoordinated. 
 
2.1 Regional electricity markets 
 
Considering the geographical distribution  and the interconnection capacities , the European 
electricity market i s mainly composed of several interconnected regional markets  [16], 
including Central Western Europe (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, the 
Netherlands, Switzerland) , the British Isles (G reat Britain, Ireland ), Northern Europe 
(Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Sweden, Norway) , the Apennine Peninsula 
(Italy, Malta), the Iberian Peninsula (Spain and Portugal), Central Eastern Europe (Czechia, 
Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia) , and South Eastern Europe (Bulgaria, 
Croatia, Greece, and Serbia). Compared with the electricity markets in  Eastern Europe, the 
Central Western Europe, the British Isles,  Northern Europe, the Apennine Peninsula, and 
the Iberian Peninsula  are further integrated not only by the day-ahead market but also by 
the intraday market and the balancing market [17]. 
 
In this work, the national electricity markets of Denmark (Northern Europe) , France 
(Central Western Europe) , Germany  (Central Western Europe) , Great Britain (British 
Isles), Italy  (Apennine Peninsula) , Norway  (Northern Europe) , and Spain  (Iberian 
Peninsula) are selected and selected as the “major European electricity market s”, due to the 
economic impact of these countries in Europe and the representativeness and market share 
in their respective regional market.  
3. BESS in Europe: current situation and market applications 
 
According to the recent ly published report from the European Commission  [18], although 
the dominating energy storage reservoir in Europe is still pumped hydro s torage, new 
batteries projects are being developed  rapidly especially in Germany and the UK . The 

 
 
report states that  the Lithium -ion batteries represent most of BESS projects. Figure 1 
presents the current installed capacity for BESS systems in different European countries. 
Meanwhile, in term s of future projection, the UK  presents the most important power 
capacity, followed by Ireland and Germany. Up to the publication of the report,  the total 
power capacity of authorized projects with electrochemical storage is 5499 MW in the UK, 
almost 10 times higher than the current operating capacity. 
 
 
Figure 1. Total installed power capacity (in MW) of operated BESS in European countries 
[18]. 
 
Flexibility is considered essential for the electrical power system in the future with a much 
higher penetration level of renewable energy. Although the potential applications of BESS, 
as a distributed and decentralized technology,  has been investigated by many research 
works. In this study, we focus only on the applications based on the existing European 
electricity market or ancillary services that are currently demanded by the system operator.  
Among all the market applications, energy arbitrage [19][20] and frequency regulation [21] 
are the most common  form of BESS application in electricity markets . Energy arbitrage 
refers to the benefit obtained from the price difference of the whole market : charging 
during low-price periods, discharging during high -price periods. Frequency regulation, on 
the other hand, requires BESS to deliver dynamic power in response to frequency deviation 
of the system or in response to automatic or manually controlled reserve services  [22]. 
Apart from the two main market applications mentioned above, other BESS solutions in the 
power grid may include but not limited to  congestion management  [23], end-user 
applications [24][25], isolated power grid [26], local markets [27], peak-load shaving [28], 
and hybrid system [29].  
 
Focusing on energy arbitrage  application, Núñez et al.  [30] calculated and compared the 
Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) for different European 
countries in 2019  and concluded that the application is not economically feasible  at that 
time. Among all the countries with negative economic indicators,  the most promising 
countries would be the United Kingdom and Ireland, while Spain and Portugal showed the 


 
 
worst performances. The result aligns with other previous research works  [31][32], which 
generally argue that arbitrage in itself cannot support investments in the energy storage 
sector. 
 
And for frequency regulating services and mixed applications, in the UK, Gundogdu et al. 
[22] developed a control algorithm for maximizing the profit in Frequency Response 
Services and Energy Arbitrage in the UK electricity markets , the control  parameters have 
been validated using existing BESS platforms.  
 
Thien et al.  [33] investigated operational requirements of the German FCR market and 
simulated the BESS operation with a 5 MW/ 5 MWh battery storage system , at the same 
time operational strategies are proposed and validated with the system frequency of the 
year 2014.  Münderlein et al.  [34] introduced different marketing strategies providing  
frequency control service in Germany using the same BESS platform , and the result shows 
considerable profitability in the FCR market . Koller et al [35] tested different applications 
including the primary frequency control using a 1MW/580MWh BESS in Zurich, 
Switzerland. Oudalov et al.  [36] developed an optimization algorithm for primary 
frequency control using BESS. 
 
In Nordic electricity markets, Heine et al. [37] and Hellman et al.  [38] tested an industrial-
sized BESS for providing frequency control services in  Finland and proved that the 
availability of the battery system could be considerably improved with optimized charging 
and discharging strategies.  Also focusing on the Finish electricity market  Divshali and 
Evens [39] studied the bidding strategy of BESS in the frequency containment reserve 
(FCR) market with empirical data. Filippa et al.  [40] simulated the economic performance 
of BESS providing Frequency Containment Reserve for Normal operation  (FCR-N) under 
Eastern Denmark’s (DK2) regulations.  Ahčin et al.  [41] performed a techno -economic 
analysis of BESS in the Norwegian electricity market and concluded that compared with 
other services, frequency regulation is currently the most feasible application. 
 
The main limitations in the currently available literature are listed as follows . Firstly, most 
related research works are conducted for specific applications/services with specific market 
conditions, and t he operational strategies  of BESS in these works are often highly 
optimized accordingly. However, it becomes difficult to apply those proposed models to 
other s imilar applications or markets.  Thus, a general across -the-board model for BESS 
operation is extremely necessary for common market applications in deregulated electricity 
markets.  
 
Secondly, deterministic valuation modeled such as “net present value” or “payback 
periods” are normally calculated in the current feasibility studies and economic analyses. 
However, due to the operational  flexibility of the BESS, a  battery would only be operated 
when the market price spread or the spread between the service remuneration and the 
corresponding cost is positive.  As a result, similar to the dark/spark spread options for 
thermal power plants, option-based models would be more appropriate for BESS operation 
modeling.    
 

 
 
Thirdly, since most of the research works are focusing on specific applications, the result 
obtained would not be easily compared among different markets or even among  different 
applications. Meanwhile, the current studies are not able  to provide a general picture of the 
future potential utilization of BESS for grid applications.  
 
In order to shape a future pathway of BESS in Europe and correctly address the  operation 
flexibility, a general option -based BESS operation model is presented with utilization 
analysis conducted for the major European electricity markets . Utilization analysis is a 
common method for measuring the potential for energy projects. Concepts such as 
“Equipment Utilization Hours [ 42]” and “Degree of Utilization [ 43]” are widely used for 
feasibility studies in  wind, solar , and hydro power projects . In this paper, r ather than 
measuring by total ener gy delivered from the device,  the utilization factor  “potentially 
profitable utilization time” proposed by Hu et al. [5] has been applied in this paper.  
 
The advantage of the proposed method would include, on the one hand, the proposed 
utilization factors  would be  more effective in measuring the future market potential  for 
different stakeholders such as system operators, policy -makers, and technology promoters  
even though  the project  is not economically feasible. On the other hand, the potentially 
profitable utilization time is a valuable measurement to compare the market potential for 
different applications with different remuneration structures [5]. 
 
4. Potential utilization of BESS in the EU 
 
4.1 General BESS payoff and operation model in electricity markets 
 
We present a general BESS operation model taking into consideration the operational 
flexibility of the system. In deregulated electricity markets, BESS gets paid by selling the 
stored energy or by providing services of flexibility. On the contrary, the expenses shall 
include the battery wear cost and the operational costs. Mea nwhile, the state of charge of 
BESS needs to be balanced after providing a certain service or application. Due to the 
operational flexibility, BESS assets are only operated when it is profitable. Thus the payoff 
for a certain time period t for a specific application can be written as 
 
Payofft = max(S + B − O, 0), 
 
where, 
S is the remuneration of the service, 
B is the balancing term,  
O is the operating expenses, including the battery wear cost and other expenses. 
 

 
 
Note that this formula above could be considered as an option liked  model where the 
remuneration of the service and the balancing term contain stochastic variables  such as 
energy prices, while the operational expenses could be taken as the strike price. The 
“storage option” would only be excised when the payoff value is higher than zero.    
 
In fact, the payoff of BESS applications depends on the specific market design. The service 
remuneration may include different terms, in general, the service payments in Europe are 
normally based on power capacity , in national currency per MW, and/or energy supported, 
in national currency per MWh . At the same time,  a BESS may receive positive 
remuneration through the  energy balancing in the case that the BESS is discharged in the 
balancing phase. In conclusion, the  service rumination term S and the balancing term B 
now become, 
 
S = PcCs + PsdEsd − PscEsc, 
B =  PbdEbd − PbcEbc , 
 
where,  
Pc is the capacity price for battery service, 
Cs is the power capacity provided,  
Psd is the discharge price for battery service, 
Psc is the charge price for battery service, 
Esd is the discharged energy for battery service, 
Esc is the charge energy for battery service, 
Pbd is the discharge price for energy balancing, 
Pbc is the charge price for energy balancing, 
Ebd is the discharged energy for energy balancing, 
Ebc is the charge energy for energy balancing, 
η is the round-trip efficiency. 
  
For BESS assets, a round -trip efficiency is defined as the energy required being charged 
beforehand, in kWh for example, to generate one kWh of electricity by discharging the 
battery. The round-trip efficiency is one of the key characters of specific BESS: the higher 
the ratio, the more efficient the battery system and the less the energy loss during the 
storage process. If we consider that the battery status is balanced for the service, there is, 
 
Esd + Ebd  =  Esc ∙ η +  Ebc ∙ η . 
 
On the other hand, the lifetime of batteries is not infinite due to the degradation  caused by 
every charge -discharge cycle  [44]. Also, t he battery degradation may also increase the 
internal resistance and decrease the round -trip efficiency [45]. Once the chemicals inside a 
battery cell are exhausted, the cell would need to be replaced. For modeling purpose s, the 
lifetime of battery systems is commonly  described as cycle life , which is defined as the 
number of complete charge -discharge cycles that the battery can perform before  it gets 
replaced or its nominal capacity falls below a certain level  of its initial rated capacity [ 46]. 
Accordingly, t he cost of the delivered energy from the battery  can be calculated as the 

 
 
battery cost per kWh divided by the Equivalent Full Cycles until the battery is replaced 
[47]. Therefore, the term of battery wear cost O can be calculated as, 
 
O = Wd(Esd +  Ebd) + opex , 
 
where, 
Wd is the battery wear cost per unit of energy delivered from the battery, 
opex is the term for other marginal operating expenses.  
 
In order to estimate the battery wear cost, the following references are taken into 
consideration. For the common Li -ion batteries, Zubi et al. estimated the battery specific 
cost to be around 300 €/kWh with a cycle life around 2000 cycles [48]. And for real battery 
storage products, T esla provides a warranty that guarantees 70% energy retention in 10 
years with a maximum number of 2800 Equivalent Full Cycles for its Li -ion battery 
product “Powerwall” [ 49]. If we cons ider an empirical battery storage cost of 300 €/kWh 
and a conservative  estimation of 3000 equivalent full cycles lifetime before the battery is 
replaced, it would imply a pure battery wear cost of 0.1 €/kWh (100 €/MWh).  At the same 
time, since it is commonly expected that the battery cost would decline with an increased  
battery lifetime  in the following years, in this study, we consider the battery wear cost 
ranges from 0 to 0.1 €/kWh (0 to 100 €/MWh).  
 
In this work, a utilization analysis is conducted by comparing the  potentially profitable 
utilization time of BESS for grid applications in different European countries. The 
Potentially Profitable Utilization Time (PPUT) defined by Hu et al. [5], can be calculated as 
the total time periods that the payoff is higher than zero, where, 
 
PPUT = sum
𝑡
(Payofft > 0)  . 
 
Accordingly, the Potentially Profitable Utilization Rate (PPUR) of BESS for a specific time 
period can be defined as the potentially profitable utilization time during this time period 
divided by the whole time period, 
 
PPUR =
sum
𝑡
(Payofft > 0)
T   , 
 
 
where T is the total time period. 
 
4.2 Energy arbitrage and day-ahead markets 
 
One of the most discussed applications for BESS is the energy arbitrage, where BESS buys 
energy when the electri city price is low and sells electricity  during peak hours when the 
price is high . If the price signal is correct , BESS is s upposed to  store elec tricity when  

 
 
renewable energy production is relatively high and the power load is relative ly low, and 
vice versa. 
 
In this work, the operational frequency energy arbitrage is considered as daily cycles. In 
other words, the battery system will perform one full charge -discharge cycle daily. The 
reasons have been discussed by Hu et al. [5] Firstly, due to the demand and solar pattern, a 
daily pattern of electricity price with peak and valley hours is generally observed. 
Secondly, the daily operation cycle aligns with the designed operation pattern in terms of 
the designed lifetime and warranty provided by the manufacturer. And lastly, with common 
BESS designs which store energy for only a few hours, it would not be meaningful to 
perform energy arbitrage in longer time periods.  
 
For energy arbitrage the remuneration of the application is sol ely the  energy discharged 
during the peak hours, the BESS operation and payoff function can be written as follow (for 
the sake of simplicity, it is assumed that the other operational cost has been included as the 
battery wear cost), 
 
Payoffd = max(PsdEsd  − PbcEbc  −  WdEsd, 0), 
 
Esd  =  Ebc ∙ η , 
 
where,  
Payoffd is the daily payoff of BESS for energy arbitrage, 
Psd and Pbc are the hourly prices when BESS chooses to perform energy arbitrage. 
 
In this work, h istorical market price s (Jan 2019 – Sep 2021) from  the day-ahead market  
(obtained from ENTSO -E) have been used to conduct the analysis. Since BESS would 
attempt to maximize the profit, the daily maximum and minimum hourly prices are selected 
as the prices to discharge and charge the storage asset respecti vely. In other words, it is 
assumed that the BESS is with perfect price information. Despite the fact that it is not 
practically achievable for the BESS operator to perfectly predict the price in the day -ahead 
market, short-term price models can be used in revealing useful information about the price 
difference, and the energy positions could be corrected in the intraday market.  
 
Figure 2 presents the potentially  profitable utilization rate for energy arbitrage  under 
different battery wear costs from January 2019 to September 2021  in the countries being 
studied, in Days. It should be noted that in some of the countries, there are several bidding 
zones with different market price s. In Figure 2, bidding zones “IT -Centre-South”, “DK1”, 
and “NO1” are selected for Italy, Denmark and Norway. Detailed analysis focusing on the 
effect of bidding zones w ill be presented after. And for the market in the UK, the bidding  
zone GB (Great Britain) is selected, and a conversion rate of 1 GBP = 1.12 EUR has been 
considered. 
 

 
 
 
Figure 2. Potentially profitable utilization rate (Y-Axis) for energy arbitrage under different 
battery wear cost (in €/MWh, X-axis) in the major European electricity markets. 
 
The interpretation of  curves would represent the potential utilization of BESS given the 
conditional cost reduction in the future . When a curve is more to the right  side, it means 
that the battery cost required is lower in order to obtain benefits. In contrast, a curve shif ted 
to the left indicates that , even with high er battery costs, it is possib le to profitably operate 
BESS for a certain number of days.  
 
It can be observed that the battery utilization cost required for a BESS to be potentially 
profitable varies greatly among the European countries. Under a current empirical battery 
wear cost (approximately 100€/MWh), energy arbitrage  will not be profitable for most of 
the countries in the EU. However, if the battery wear cost and other variable cost decreases 
below 40-50€/MWh, the potentially profitable utilization time will start to increase rapidly 
for most of the European countries and local markets such as  Great Britain, France, 
Germany, and Italy. Other countries such as Spain would require a much lower battery cost, 


 
 
lower than 20€/MWh,  for energy arbitrage. Lastly, for Norway, energy arbitrage is hardly 
profitable even with a very low battery wear cost.  
 
 
Figure 3 Potentially profitable utilization rate (Y-Axis) for energy arbitrage under different 
battery wear cost (in €/MWh, X-axis) in Italy (a), Demark (b), and Norway (c), in 2020. 
 
As mentioned above, in some countries there are several separate bidding zones, and the 
remuneration of BESS would be different depending on the location. Figure 3 presents the 
potentially profitable utilization time for energy arbitrage under different ba ttery wear costs 
in 2020 in Italy, Denmark , and Norway. In most cases, the curves of potentially profitable 
utilization time are similar in the same country. However, the bidding zone Sicily in Italy 
shows much higher potential utilization for BESS in energy arbitrage applications.  
 
The high potential utilization for BESS could be also overserved in other regi onal markets 
with limited interconnection capacity. Figure 4 presents the potentially profitable utilization 
time for energy arbitrage under different battery wear cost s in Great Britain and Ireland. In 
Ireland, the potential utilization of BESS in energy arbitrage would be even more profitable 
than in Great Britain for given battery wear costs.  
 


 
 
 
Figure 4. Potentially profitable utilization rate (Y-Axis) for energy arbitrage under different 
battery wear cost (in €/MWh, X-axis) in Great Britain and Ireland, Jan 2019 to Sep 2021 
 
 
The result could be explained by the following two factors: the flexibility in the generation 
structure and the interconnection with the neighboring countries. On the one hand, 
countries such as Spain and Norway present high flexibility due to their genera tion 
structure, in which hydraulic power generation represents a significant percentage of total 
generation. However, countries such as France and Germany are highly dependent on the 
power generation technologies which are  less flexible, such as nuclear power and coal 
power.  
 
On the other hand, the power interconnection also plays a key role that affects the price 
fluctuation in the day-ahead market. The price signal of the larger market player may have 
a significant impact on the regional market. And local markets get merged if the 
interconnection capacity among countries is sufficient enough, for example,  Germany and 
Luxemburg are sharing the same bidding zone. This would explain the similar utilization 
curves among the central European countries.  On the contrary, countries such as Great 
Britain and Ireland, despite having certain interconnections with other European countries, 
are relatively isolated from continental Europe.  Higher market price volatility  has b een 
observed in these relatively isolated local  markets since the flexibility demand cannot be 
supplied by alternative flexibility resources in the neighboring markets. 
 
4.3 Frequency containment reserve 
 
Unlike the day-ahead market, up to the present,  there is no common market design for the 
frequency support services across the European countries. For the FCR service (also known 
as the primary reserve) , the remuneration structure varie s in terms of capacity payments, 
energy payments and market clearing methods. Meanwhile, the technical requirements also 
vary in different terms  such as frequency band and response time requirements .  Table 1 
presents a summary of the FCR services for the countries being studied. Note that in some 
countries, the FCR market could be different depending on the bidding zone  and supported 
by several separated products.  
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
(Insert Table 1 about here) 
 
 
 
At a regional electricity market level , the primary reserve service s (FCR) in the Apennine 
Peninsula and the Iberian Peninsula (e.g, Spain, Portugal and Italy ) are mandatory and not 
remunerable. And in Central Western Europe  (Denmark-DK1, France and Germany) , 
thanks to the  FCR Cooperation project, the FCR markets have  been more integrated 
recently. Also, similar services and products are shared for the FCR markets in  Northern 
Europe (Denmark-DK2 and Norway) . Lastly, in the British Isles , the FCR s ervice is 
complicated since the market integration level is relatively low. For example, in the UK the 
“Firm Frequency Response ” is tender based and the procuring of the service is based on 
case-by-case studies . Also, the UK has l aunched another service named “Enhanced 
Frequency Response” focusing on energy storage facilities in 2016. However, the service is 
contracted for only 4 years and there would be no future auctions. 
 
In this work, the potential utilization analysis is conducted for the remunerable and 
standardized frequency containment reserve services: the FCR services in Central Western 
Europe (France and Germany , Denmark-DK1 is not included in this  analysis since it has 
joined the integrated  FCR market less than a year) and Northern Europe (Denmark -DK2 
and Norway). 
 
4.3.1 FCR service in the Central Western Europe 
 
When providing frequency regulation services, BESS  receives remuneration ma inly from 
the capa city payments. In exchange, BESS should  provide required upward/downward 
energy according to the frequency deviation by discharging/charging the batteries 
respectively.  
 
Table 2 presents the expected hourly required regulating energy and balancing energy for 
providing 1MW power capacity in FCR obtained from different sources. It should be noted 
that the required information for precisely simulating the energy response for frequency 
regulation services (e.g. detailed electricity power frequency data with time resolution in 
seconds) is generally not publically available.  
 
The fi rst three rows in Table 2 prese nt the expected regulating and balancing energy 
calculated from the FCR operation al data from the France market from 2019 to Sep tember 
2021. The required regulating energy ( FCR upward and FCR downward ) is obtained 
directly from the published hourly operational data, and the  hourly balancing energy is 
calculated on an hourly basis to balance the required regulating energy.  
 

 
 
Table 2. Expected hourly required regulating energy and balancing energy for providing 
1MW power capacity in the FCR Market (Germany and France) 
 
Country Time Period 
FCR 
Upward 
(Esd) 
FCR 
Downward 
(Esc) 
Balancing 
Discharging 
(Ebd) 
Balancing 
Charging 
(Ebc) 
Round-trip 
efficiency 
(η) 
Notes 
France 2019 0.056 0.057 0.026 0.040 0.850 
Calculated from Hourly 
operational data from the 
France FCR data 2019 
France 2020 0.051 0.052 0.022 0.035 0.850 
Calculated from Hourly 
operational data from the 
France FCR data 2020 
France 2021  
(Jan-Sep) 0.054 0.051 0.020 0.036 0.850 
Calculated from Hourly 
operational data from the 
France FCR data 2021 Jan-
Sep 
Germany 2014 0.035 0.036 0.019 0.033 0.776 Thien et al.(2017) [33] 
France 2019 to  
Sep 2021 0.054 0.053 0.023 0.037 0.850 
Selected for evaluating the 
potential utilization in this 
study 
 
In Germany, the required regulating energy  for the FCR service is not published by the 
Transmission System Operator (TSO) . On the other hand , Thien et al.  (2017) [33] have 
simulated the  required energy  using the  power frequency data  in Germany  in 2014 
(referenced data source for power frequency  no longer available) with a 5MW BESS , 
presented in the fourth row in Table 2.  
 
Comparing the expected hourly required regulating energy and balancing energy, it can be 
observed that the level of energy usage  in France has been relatively stable d uring the last 
three years. And the regulating and balancing energy presented by Thien et al. [33] are 
slightly lower for Germany in 2014. The difference in energy usage between France and 
German data could be explained by the difference in operating strategy optimization. In the 
work of Thien et al. [33], the operational strategies are highly optimized for battery 
systems, and in contrast, the French published data is real measured data  from all the 
service providers with different technologies. The energy usage calculated from the French 
data would be higher, s ince the efficiency for  general French providers is expected  to be 
lower than BESS with optimized operational strategy presented by Thien et al. [33].  
 
In this study, the expected values of regulating energy and balancing energy from the 
French data for the last three years (presented in the sixth row  in Table 2 ) are selected for 
calculating the potential utilization using the proposed model in both countries. Firstly, 
since France and Germany are within the same synchronous grid of Continental Europe, the 
frequency is  assumed to be the same  with usually very minor deviations. Secondly, the 
French data is more recent and it is  stable during the years  being studied. And lastly, the 
French data is selected to avoid over estimation of potential profitability, since the energy 
usage in the French data is generally higher than the data presented by Thien et al. [33], 
which implies a higher battery wear cost. 
 

 
 
One may argue  that in real-world operation, for any specific hour, the required regulating 
energy and balancing energy  might be  significantly different from  the annual expected 
energy values, and this may cause overestimation/underestimation of t he profitability for 
that specific hour.  The argument is true but t he proposed method is still valid since the 
expected energy terms are expected to be stable for a power system in the long run. And the 
hourly error caused by the difference between the real energy utilization and the expected 
energy utilization will be compensated accordingly. 
 
Figure 5 presents the potentially profitable utilization rate for the FCR market  under 
different battery cost s for the time period 2019 - Sep 2021 in France and Germany . 
Compared with energy arbitrage, t he result shows a significant improvement in term s of 
potentially profitable utilization in the FCR market.  
 
 
Figure 5. Potentially profitable utilization rate (Y-Axis) for the FCR market under different 
battery wear cost (in €/MWh, X-axis), Jan 2019 to Sep 2021. 
 
4.3.2 FCR-N service in the Northern Europe 
 
In Nordic countries, the FCR service is  normally divided into two levels: the FCR -N 
(Frequency Containment Reserve for Normal operation) and FCR -D (Frequency 
Containment Reserves for Disturbances). In this study, the analysis is based on the FCR -N 
service since it provides the first -level response which requires a dynamic response to the 
frequency changes.  
 
The operational information for the FCR -N service, however, is not generally publicly 
published for most of the markets.  Starting from 2021, the Finish TSO Fingrid  has 
published FCR-N data, including the yearly market plans, hourly market volumes, foreign 
trade capacity, active power reserves, and hourly market prices. Table 3 presents the 
expected hourly required regulating energy and balancing energy for providing 1MW 
power capacity in the FCR-N market in Finland from January to September 2021. 
 
Compared with the FCR service in France and Germany, the general required energy for 
regulation for the FCR-N service is higher, due to the fact that the frequency band requiring 


 
 
full activation is lower (±0.1Hz for FCR -N in the Nordic countries  and ±0.2Hz for FCR  in 
Central Western Europe).  
 
Table 3. Expected hourly required regulating energy and balancing energy for providing 
1MW power capacity in the FCR-N Market (Finland) 
 
Country Time Period 
FCR-N 
Upward 
(Esd) 
FCR-N 
Downward 
(Esc) 
Balancing 
Discharging 
(Ebd) 
Balancing 
Charging 
(Ebc) 
Round-trip 
efficiency 
(η) 
Notes 
Finland 2021  
(Jan-Sep) 0.091 0.093 0.079 0.107 0.850 
Calculated from Hourly 
operational data from the 
Finnish FCR-N data 2021 
 
In this study, the expected values of regulating energy and balancing energy from the 
Finnish data in 2021 are selected for calculating the potential utilization using the proposed 
model for Denmark -DK2 and Norway, both of these areas , together with Finland,  are 
within the same synchronous grid of Northern Europe. 
   
Figure 6 presents the potentially profitable utilization rate for the FCR-N market under 
different battery cost s for the time period 2019 - Sep 2021 in Denmark and Norway. Note 
that the FCR -N market would include different action sessions, in this study, the daily 
auction D -1 is analyzed since the daily market provides more information regarding the 
real-time supply and demand for flexibility.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Potentially profitable utilization rate (Y-axis) for the FCR-N market under different 
battery wear cost (in €/MWh, X-axis), Jan 2019 to Sep 2021. 
 
 
The result shows a great potential utilization for the frequency regulation service using 
BESS in Denmark, in January to September 2021, a BESS would be profitable in providing 
the FCR-N service in almost all the hourly time periods even under a marginal operating 
cost of 100 €/MWh. And in the other years, the potentially profitable utilization rate is also 
attractive under the current battery wear cost assumption.  
 


 
 
On the other  hand, the potentially profitable utilization rate for the FCR -N service in 
Norway is significantly lower than the Danish market. Under the current cost assumption of 
100 €/MWh, the potentially profitable utilization is under 20% for all the time periods 
being studied. It would require further declines in the cost of the batteries for achieving a 
higher potential utilization. It should be  also noted that, in the Norwegian market, the 
potential utilization of BESS in proving FCR -N service is much higher than the application 
of energy arbitrage.  
5. Conclusions and discussions 
 
Given the continuously declining cost of battery  technology in the la st decade, nowadays 
BESS becomes more attractive for power grid applications . Since BESS operation in 
deregulated markets would depend on the real-time market price and the operating cost, the 
potential utilization of BESS in different major European electricity market s has been  
investigated based on the proposed  general BESS payoff model considering service 
remunerations and operational costs. Utilization factors such as potentially profitable 
utilization time and rate are calculated for common applications including energy arbitrage 
and FCR services using historical market information.  
 
The results show that  under the current empirical estimation of the installation cost  and 
lifetime (300 €/kWh and 3000 Full equivalent cycles ), the battery wear cost resulting from 
degradation would prevent BESS from being profitable for energy arbitrage in  most of the 
European electricity markets . Meanwhile, significant heterogeneity of the potential 
profitability of BESS  has been observed among different major European 
markets/countries. The analysis of energy arbitrage applications in the major European day-
ahead market s also reveals useful information about the general scarcity of flexibility 
among the electricity markets.  According to the result, the electricity market in Great 
Britain would be most promising for BESS in ene rgy arbitrage, and similar  local markets 
would include, but not limited to, the energy mark et in Ireland, and  the Sicily Island of  
Italy. On the contrary, the potential profitability of energy arbitrage using BESS is quite 
limited in cou ntries such as Norway and Spain, where the flexibility is generally provided 
with other energy sources such as hydropower and pumped hydro storage systems.  
 
On the other hand , rather than buying and selling energy directly in the wholesale 
electricity market, BESS shows clearly and significantly higher potential in providing 
frequency supporting services in all the markets being studied. The result shows that even 
under the current battery cost assumptions, when the frequency containment reserve is 
remunerable, the potentially profitable utilization of BESS has become already accretive in 
most of the European countries , except Norway.  For example in some particular time 
periods such as January to September  2021, the potentially profitable utilization rate may 
reach almost 100% for the FCR-N service in the Danish market. 
 
In summary, comparing the major electricity markets in  Europe, BESS has shown its 
potential in becoming a feasible solution in Central Western Europe and parts of  Northern 
Europe by providing frequency regulation services. Further effort should be conducted 

 
 
focusing on the frequency regulating services in these markets to break down the barriers to 
BESS. On the other side , the potential application of BESS is quite limited in the 
Norwegian market. The most obvious explication would be the extremely high penetra tion 
level of hydro power in this  country. Lastly, in other markets where the FCR services (or 
primary reserve s) are not remunerable, such as the Apennine Peninsula and the Iberian 
Peninsula, BESS would not be feasible for energy arbitrage under the current situation. The 
potential utilization of BESS should be investigated for other frequency supporting services 
such as the aFRR services (secondary reserve) and mFRR services (tertiary reserve). Lastly, 
in the British Isles and some other islanded local markets, BESS would be considerably 
promising given the high volatility of the wholesale market prices , further works should be 
conducted to review the market design and correctly address the flexibility of BESS. 
 
During the investigation, it has been observed that serious improvement is necessary 
regarding general market information accessibility and market data quality and 
transparency. Due to the distributive and decentralized nature of BESS, market and 
information transparency would be critical for the future development of BESS 
applications, especially for smaller market participants. For market and system regulators 
and operators, more efforts are necessary to ensure an open, fair, and non -discriminative 
market of system flex ibility. Also, future research work should be elaborated by exploring 
novel market and service designs that adequately and appropriately address the flexibility 
provided by different technologies including the batteries. 
 
This paper focuses on evaluating a nd comparing the potential utilization of BESS in the 
European electricity markets. It should be noted that historical information has been applied 
to study and understand the characteristics of the selected markets. Indeed, for 
quantitatively access ing the project value and feasibility, valuation model s should be 
conducted for real future market scenarios.  Given the fact that  the proposed BESS payoff 
model is composed of a set of spread option s based on the price difference between  the 
service remunerat ion and the battery operating cost , future research of BESS feasibility 
may focus on valuation methods based on option pricing models. 
 
 
Reference 
 
[1] Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30  June 
2021 establishing the  framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending 
Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) 
 
[2] HM Government. (2020) The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution; HM 
Government: London, UK, 2020.  
 
[3] Propos al for a DIRECTIVE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE 
COUNCIL amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council and 
Directive 98/70/EC of the European  Parliament and of the Council as regards the 

 
 
promotion of energy from renewable sources, and repealing Council Directive (EU) 
2015/652 
 
[4] Zsiborács, H., Baranyai, N. H., Vincze, A., Zentkó, L., Birkner, Z., Máté, K., & Pintér , 
G. (2019). Intermittent renewable energy sources: The role of energy storage in the 
european power system of 2040. Electronics, 8(7), 729. 
 
[5] Hu, Y., Soneira, D. S., & Sánchez, M. J. (2021). Barriers to grid -connected battery 
systems: Evidence from the  Spanish electricity market. Journal of Energy Storage, 35, 
102262. 
 
[6] Directive 96/92/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 December 
1996 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity 
 
[7] Lago, J., De Ridder, F., Vranc x, P., & De Schutter, B. (2018). Forecasting day-ahead 
electricity prices in Europe: the importance of considering market integration. Applied 
energy, 211, 890-903. 
 
[8] Bunn, D. W., & Gianfreda, A. (2010). Integration and shock transmissions across 
European electricity forward markets. Energy Economics, 32(2), 278-291. 
 
[9] European Network of Transmission System Operators . (2018). An Overview of the 
European Balancing Market and Electricity Balancing Guideline. 
 
[10] ACER/CEER. (2018). The 2017 Annual Report on Monitoring the Electricity and Gas 
Markets. 
 
[11] Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July 2015 establishing a guideline on 
capacity allocation and congestion management.  
 
[12] Price Coupling of Regions, (2013). Euphemia Public Description: PCR Market 
Coupling Algorithm. 
 
[13] Miguélez, E. L., Cortés, I. E., Rodríguez, L. R., & Camino, G. L. (2008). An overview 
of ancillary services in Spain. Electric Power Systems Research, 78(3), 515-523. 
 
[14] Wang, J., & Xu, W. (2016). Present situation and problems of large -scale wind power 
transmission and accommodation policy. In Large -Scale Wind Power Grid Integration (pp. 
257-276). Academic Press. 
 
[15] UCTE (2009), UCTE Operation Handbook – Policy 1: Load -Frequency Control and 
Performance. Technical Report UCTE OH P1, Union for the Co -ordination of 
Transmission of Electricity. 
 
[16] European Commission. (2021) “Quarterly Report  on European Electricity Markets” 
Volume 14 (issue 2, second quarter of 2021). Brussels, 2021. 
 

 
 
[17] IRENA (2019), Innovation landscape brief: Regional markets, International 
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. 
 
[18] European Commission. (2020). Study on energy storage. contribution to the security of 
the electricity supply in europe. Technical report, European Commission. 
 
[19] Ding, Y., Shao, C., Yan, J., Song, Y., Zhang, C., & Guo, C. (2018). Economical 
flexibility options for integrating fluctuating wind energy in power systems: The case of 
China. Applied Energy, 228, 426-436. 
 
[20] García-Miguel, P. L. C., Asensio, A. P., Merino, J. L., & Plaza, M. G. (2022). Analysis 
of cost of use modelling impact on a battery energy storage system providing arbitrage 
service. Journal of Energy Storage, 50, 104203. 
 
[21] IRENA (2019), Innovation landscape brief: Utility -scale batteries, International 
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. 
 
[22] Gundogdu, B. M., Gladwin, D. T., Nejad, S., & Stone, D. A. (2019). Scheduling of 
grid-tied battery energy storage system participating in frequency response services and 
energy arbitrage. IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution, 13(14), 2930-2941. 
 
[23] Fiorini, L., Pagani, G. A., Pelacchi, P., Poli, D., and Aiello, M. (2017). Sizing and 
siting of large-scale batteries in transmission grids to optimize the use of renewables.  IEEE 
Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 7(2), 285-294. 
 
[24] Faraji, J., Ketabi, A., & Hashemi -Dezaki, H. (2020). Optimization of the scheduling 
and operation of prosumers considering the loss of life costs of battery storage systems. 
Journal of Energy Storage, 31, 101655. 
 
[25] Kusakana, K. (2020). Optimal peer -to-peer energy management between grid -
connected prosumers with battery storage and photovoltaic systems . Journal of Energy 
Storage, 32, 101717. 
 
[26] Paliwal, P. (2020). Reliability constrained planning and sensitivity analysis for Solar -
Wind-Battery based Isolated Power System. International Journal of Sustainable Energy 
Planning and Management, 29, 109-126. 
 
[27] Lüth, A., Zepter, J. M., del Granado, P. C., & Egging, R. (2018). Local electricity 
market designs for peer-to-peer trading: The role of battery flexibility. Applied energy, 229, 
1233-1243. 
 
[28] Martins, R., Hesse, H. C., Jungbauer, J., Vorbuchner, T., & Musilek, P. (2018). 
Optimal component sizing for peak shaving in battery energy storage system for industrial 
applications. Energies, 11(8), 2048. 
 

 
 
[29] Xu, X., Hu, W., Cao, D.,  Huang, Q., Liu, Z., Liu, W ., & Blaabjerg, F. (2020). 
Scheduling of wind -battery hybrid system in the electricity market using distributionally 
robust optimization. Renewable Energy. 
 
[30] Núñez, F., Canca, D., & Arcos -Vargas, Á. (2020). An assessment of European 
electricity arbitrage using storage systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11912. 
 
[31] Zafirakis, D., Chalvatzis, K. J., Baiocchi, G., & Daskalakis, G. (2016). The value of 
arbitrage for energy storage: Evidence from European electricity markets. Applied energy, 
184, 971-986. 
 
[32] McConnell, D., Forcey, T., & Sandiford, M. (2015). Estimating the value of electricity 
storage in an energy-only wholesale market. Applied Energy, 159, 422-432. 
 
[33] Thien, T., Schweer, D., vom Stein, D., Moser, A., & Sauer, D. U. (2017). Real -world 
operating strategy and sensitivity analysis of frequency containment reserve provision with 
battery energy storage systems in the german market. Journal of energy storage, 13, 143 -
163. 
 
[34] Münderlein, J., Steinhoff, M., Zurmühlen, S., & Sauer, D. U. (2019). Analysis and 
evaluation of operations strategies based on a large scale 5 MW and 5 MWh battery storage 
system. Journal of energy storage, 24, 100778. 
 
[35] Koller, M., Borsche, T., Ulbig, A., & Andersson, G. (2015). Review of grid 
applications with the Zurich 1 MW battery energy storag e system. Electric Power Systems 
Research, 120, 128-135. 
 
[36] Oudalov, A., Chartouni, D., & Ohler, C. (2007). Optimizing a battery energy storage 
system for primary frequency control. IEEE Transactions on power systems, 22(3), 1259 -
1266. 
 
[37] Heine, P., Pihkala, A., Hellman, H. P., Siilin, K., Takala, S., Ruokolainen, P., & 
Laasonen, M. (2019). Battery Energy Storage System for Frequency Control and Fast Peak 
Shaving-Case Helsinki. In 2019 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe 
(ISGT-Europe) (pp. 1-5). IEEE. 
 
[38] Hellman, H. P., Pihkala, A., Hyvärinen, M., Heine, P., Karppinen, J., Siilin, K., ... & 
Matilainen, J. (2017). Benefits of battery energy storage system for system, market, and 
distribution network –case Helsinki. CIRED -Open Access Pro ceedings Journal, 2017(1), 
1588-1592. 
 
[39] Divshali, P. H., & Evens, C. (2020). Optimum operation of battery storage system in 
frequency containment reserves markets. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 11(6), 4906 -
4915. 
 
[40] Filippa, A., Hashemi, S., & Træ holt, C. (2019, November). Economic Evaluation of 
Frequency Reserve Provision using Battery Energy Storage. In 2019 IEEE 2nd 

 
 
International Conference on Renewable Energy and Power Engineering (REPE) (pp. 160 -
165). IEEE. 
 
[41] Ahčin, P., Berg, K., & Peterse n, I. (2019, September). Techno -economic analyis of 
battery storage for peak shaving and frequency containment reserve. In 2019 16th 
International Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM) (pp. 1-5). IEEE. 
 
[42] Zhixin, W., Chuanwen, J., Qian, A., & C hengmin, W. (2009). The key technology of 
offshore wind farm and its new development in China. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 13(1), 216-222. 
 
[43] Skoglund, A., Leijon, M., Rehn, A., Lindahl, M., & Waters, R. (2010). On the physics 
of power, en ergy and economics of renewable electric energy sources -Part II. Renewable 
energy, 35(8), 1735-1740. 
 
[44] Chawla, M., Naik, R., Burra, R., and Wiegman, H. (2010). Utility energy storage life 
degradation estimation method. In  2010 IEEE Conference on Innovative Technologies for 
an Efficient and Reliable Electricity Supply (pp. 302-308). IEEE. 
 
[45] Yang, F., Xie, Y., Deng, Y. et al. Predictive modeling of battery degradation and 
greenhouse gas emissions from U.S. state -level electric vehicle operation.  Nat Commun 9, 
2429 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04826-0 
 
[46] Zhou, C., Qian, K., Allan, M., and Zhou, W. (2011). Modeling of the cost of EV 
battery wear due to V2G application in power systems.  IEEE Transactions on Energy 
Conversion, 26(4), 1041-1050. 
 
[47] Ashari, M., Nayar, C. V., and Keerthipala, W. W. L. (2001). Optimum operation 
strategy and economic analysis of a photovoltaic -diesel-battery-mains hybrid 
uninterruptible power supply. Renewable energy, 22(1-3), 247-254. 
 
[48] Zubi, G., Dufo-López, R., Carvalho, M., and Pasaoglu, G. (2018). The lithium -ion 
battery: State of the art and future perspectives.  Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 89, 292-308. 
 
[49] TESLA (2017) Tesla Powerwall limited warranty (USA), effective date: Apri l 19, 
2017. 
https://www.tesla.com/sites/default/files/pdfs/powerwall/powerwall_2_ac_warranty_us_1-
4.pdf. (Cited on 20 Nov, 2021) 
 
[50] Red Eléctrica de España (1998) Procedimiento de operación P.O. -7.1 Servicio 
complementario de regulación primaria (In Spanish) 
https://www.ree.es/sites/default/files/01_ACTIVIDADES/Documentos/ProcedimientosOpe
racion/PO_resol_30jul1998_b.pdf (Cited on 20 Nov, 2021) 
 
[51] TERNA (2008) Partecipazione alla regolazione di frequenza e frequenza -potenza (In 
Italian) 

 
 
https://download.terna.it/terna/0000/0105/32.pdf (Cited on 20 Nov, 2021) 
 
[52] RTE(2021) Frequency Ancillary Services Terms and Conditions 
https://www.services-rte.com/files/live/sites/services-
rte/files/pdf/Service%20systemes%20frequence/SSY_20200530_EN.pdf (Cited on 20 Nov, 
2021) 
 
[53] TenneT (2021) FCR Manual for BSP's, Requirements and procedures for supply of 
FCR 
https://www.tennet.eu/fileadmin/user_upload/SO_NL/Handboek_FCR_voor_BSPs_-
_EN_version.pdf (Cited on 20 Nov, 2021) 
 
[54] National Grid (2017) Firm Frequency Response (FFR) Interactive Guidance 
https://www.nationalgrideso.com/document/103306/download (Cited on 20 Nov, 2021) 
 
[55] Energinet (2021) Ancillary services to be delivered in Denmark - Tender conditions 
https://en.energinet.dk/-/media/52157CA92FA44F57B69F4635885CA4EE.pdf (Cited on 
20 Nov, 2021) 
 
[56] Dalton, J. (2018). Optimal Day -Ahead Scheduling and Bidding Strategy of Risk -
Averse Electric Vehicle Aggregator: A Case Study of the Nordic Energy and Freque ncy 
Containment Reserve Markets. 
 
 

 
 
Table 1. Summary of the FCR services in the major European electricity markets 
 
  Spain [50] Italy [51] France [52] Germany [53] UK [54] Denmark [55] Norway [56] 
Bidding Zone ES IT FR DE-LU GB DK1 DK2 NO1-NO5 
Product Name Primary 
regulation 
Primary 
regulation FCR FCR Firm Frequency 
Response (FFR) FCR FCR-N FCR-D FCR-N FCR-D 
Capacity 
payment None None Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Energy payment None None As Reference 
spot price None 
"Response Energy 
Payment" Only 
applied when the unit 
are with "fuel cost"  
As ordinary 
imbalance 
Regulating 
power price 
As ordinary 
imbalance 
Regulating 
power price None 
Frequency 
response 
requirement 
Linear 
response 
between 
49.8Hz -
50.2Hz 
Linear 
response 
between 
49.9Hz -
50.1Hz 
(normal 
operation) 
Linear 
response 
between 
49.8Hz -
50.2Hz 
Linear 
response 
between 
49.8Hz -
50.2Hz 
Linear response 
between 49.5Hz-
50.5Hz for dynamic 
response  
Full response for 
frequency lower than 
49.7Hz or higher than 
50.3Hz for static 
response  
Linear 
response 
between 
49.8Hz -
50.2Hz 
Linear 
response 
between 
49.9Hz -
50.1Hz 
Response between 
49.9Hz (0%) to 
49.5Hz (100%) 
for upward 
product 
Downward 
product be 
implemented in 
2021 
Linear response 
between 
49.9Hz - 
50.1Hz 
Response 
between 49.9Hz 
(0%) to 49.5Hz 
(100%) for 
upward product 
Downward 
product be 
implemented in 
2021 
Response time Within 15 
Seconds 
Within 15 
Seconds 
Within 15 
seconds, up 
to 15 minutes 
for Limited 
Energy 
Reservoirs 
Within 30 
seconds, up to 
30 minutes 
Within 10 Seconds, up 
to 30 minutes for 
"secondary response" 
providers and 
indefinite for "high 
frequency response" 
providers 
Within 15 
seconds up 
to 30 
minutes 
Within 150 
second up 
to 
indefinite 
Supply 50% of 
the response 
within 5 seconds 
and the remaining 
within 30 
seconds. 
63% of the 
reserve within 
60 seconds and 
the remaining 
within 180 
seconds, up to 
15 minutes 
Supply 50% of 
the response 
within 5 seconds 
and the remaining 
within 100 
seconds. 
Payment method Non-
remunerable 
Non-
remunerable 
Marginal 
pricing 
Marginal 
pricing 
Pay-as-bid by monthly 
tenders 
Marginal 
pricing Pay as bid Pay as bid Pay as bid Pay as bid 
 