1
Perturbed Decision-Focused Learning
for Modeling Strategic Energy Storage
Ming Yi, Member, IEEE, Saud Alghumayjan, Student Member, IEEE, Bolun Xu, Member, IEEE,
Abstract—This paper presents a novel decision-focused frame-
work integrating the physical energy storage model into machine
learning pipelines. Motivated by the model predictive control
for energy storage, our end-to-end method incorporates the
prior knowledge of the storage model and infers the hidden
reward that incentivizes energy storage decisions. This is achieved
through a dual-layer framework, combining a prediction layer
with an optimization layer. We introduce the perturbation idea
into the designed decision-focused loss function to ensure the
differentiability over linear storage models, supported by a the-
oretical analysis of the perturbed loss function. We also develop
a hybrid loss function for effective model training. We provide
two challenging applications for our proposed framework: energy
storage arbitrage, and energy storage behavior prediction. The
numerical experiments on real price data demonstrate that our
arbitrage approach achieves the highest profit against existing
methods. The numerical experiments on synthetic and real-
world energy storage data show that our approach achieves the
best behavior prediction performance against existing benchmark
methods, which shows the effectiveness of our method.
Index Terms —Differentiable Decision-Focused Framework,
Energy Storage Arbitrage, Perturbation Idea, Energy Storage
Behavior
I. I NTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, energy storage integration has proven
essential for economical and reliable power system decar-
bonization [1]. Facilitated by Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
mission (FERC) Order 841 [2], energy storage systems can
now participate in all wholesale energy markets in the United
States. Given their limited capacity, energy storage resources
must strategically plan their responses based on future price
expectations [3], where this process is known as energy storage
arbitrage. Price arbitrage has become one of the most popular
services [4], whereby energy storage systems discharge when
prices are high and charge when prices are low. The energy
storage arbitrage provides flexible generation and demand
capacity, improving power system efficiency and supporting
a more resilient grid.
In practice, most energy storage owners adopt a model
predictive control (MPC) framework for storage arbitrage,
which decouples price prediction from storage control. They
develop proprietary electricity price predictors to capture mar-
ket fluctuations and input the predicted prices into arbitrage
This work was supported in part by the Data Science Institute in Columbia
University and in part by the National Science Foundation under award ECCS-
2239046. (Corresponding author: Ming Yi.)
Ming Yi is with the Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York
City, NY . Saud Alghumayjan, and Bolun Xu are with Earth and Environmental
Engineering, Columbia University, New York City, NY . Email:{my2826,
saa2244, bx2177}@columbia.edu.
optimization models. However, decoupling prediction and op-
timization in MPC frameworks introduces storage control and
regulation challenges. For storage operators, machine learning
predictors often struggle to effectively account for how their
predictions will be utilized in the physical energy storage
model, particularly given the limited data availability and
computing power in practical implementations [5].
Moreover, as each energy storage owner develops their own
price predictor to maximize profits, energy storage behaviors
are intertwined with electricity pricing dynamics. Given the
volatile nature of electricity prices, these arbitrage behaviors
exhibit inherent variability, adding uncertainty to the power
system and posing significant challenges for grid operation
and planning. While energy storage offers promising benefits,
its unpredictable actions can disrupt grid stability. Electric-
ity market regulators are increasingly concerned that non-
transparent storage arbitrage models may enable operators
to exercise market power [6], potentially undermining social
welfare. As a result, regulators seek systematic approaches
to interpret proprietary prediction models and understand the
relationship between strategic storage behaviors and market
prices. Accurate prediction of energy storage behavior is thus
crucial for power system planning and operations, includ-
ing net-load forecasting, demand response estimation, market
power monitoring, and resource adequacy planning.
To address these challenges, this paper proposes a decision-
focused framework incorporating the energy storage behavior
as a perturbed differentiable layer in the learning pipeline.
Our proposed framework offers a significant advantage over
existing decision-focused approaches [7] in that it does not rely
on ground truth prediction information. The result learning
model is more efficient at both predicting and optimizing
storage operation from the perspective of storage operators
or regulators. The proposed framework is validated in two
strategic applications: (1) energy storage arbitrage, which
maximizes profit through optimized storage operations, and
(2) energy storage behavior prediction, which forecasts storage
actions based on historical data. The contributions of this paper
include:
• We develop a decision-focused, end-to-end pipeline in-
corporating the physical energy storage model. The pro-
posed framework includes a prediction layer to infer the
hidden reward and an optimization layer to model the
decision-making of energy storage.
• We exploit the perturbation idea to solve the differentiable
issue in the decision-focused loss function. We also add
a predictor regularizer in the loss function to enhance the
prediction performance.
arXiv:2406.17085v2  [eess.SY]  5 Dec 2024

2
• We provide a theoretical analysis for the perturbed loss
function. Specifically, we prove that the perturbed loss
function is convex and that its gradient is Lipschitz
continuous. We also show the connection between the
perturbed loss function and the original loss function.
• We validate the proposed framework through two ap-
plications: energy storage arbitrage and forecasting the
energy storage behavior. To the best of our knowledge,
this specific formulation for both applications has not
been studied before.
• The numerical experiments for two applications on syn-
thetic datasets and real-world datasets demonstrate that
our approach outperforms the benchmark methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews the related works. Section III introduces the formula-
tion. Section IV presents our proposed end-to-end approach.
The numerical results are reported in Section V , and Section
VI concludes our paper.
II. M OTIVATION AND RELATED WORKS
A. Learning-aided Storage Operation
Storage owners can arbitrage electricity prices by charging
energy when prices are low and selling it back when prices
are high. They can submit bids in the day-ahead market
(DAM) and the real-time market (RTM), each with its own
market clearing timelines and rules. Various methods have
been proposed, such as bi-level optimization [8] and dynamic
programming [9] [10]. For small-scale energy storage, such
as Behind-the-Meter (BTM) energy storage, owners can self-
schedule operations without informing the system operator.
Many approaches have been proposed, including dynamical
programming [11], model predictive control (MPC) [12] [13],
and reinforcement learning (RL) [14]. Electricity price fluctu-
ations are the most critical factor in deciding the best bid or
schedule options. Various models have been developed over
the years to address this uncertainty, employing techniques
such as Markov process models [15], frequency analysis [16],
and deep neural networks [17], [18]. In dynamic programming
or MPC setups, the prediction model is trained to minimize
forecast error, not decision error, resulting in suboptimal profit
maximization. Our proposed decision-focused framework in-
corporates energy storage decision-making into the model
training (i.e., training to minimize decision loss) and enhances
arbitrage performance. Additionally, our method avoids the
inefficiencies of reinforcement learning (RL), RL relies on
trial-and-error exploration to optimize policies, which can be
time-consuming and inefficient for tasks with well-defined
objectives, such as energy storage arbitrage. Our method
directly measures how well predictions support optimal de-
cisions, providing a more effective solution. Furthermore, RL
cannot handle optimization constraints effectively. RL requires
discretizing the action space, and this discretization leads to
inefficiencies in representing system dynamics, such as state-
of-charge (SoC) transitions, which increase training complex-
ity and reduce interpretability. In contrast, our approach ex-
plicitly integrates physical constraints into the model, enabling
optimized decision-making and enhancing interpretability.
B. Learning-aided Storage Monitoring
There is increasing interest in understanding and modeling
how energy-limited resources, including storage and demand-
side resources, would behave in electricity markets. One line
of related works is modeling the demand response behavior.
Both model-based and data-driven approaches are proposed
to model the price-responsive behaviors. The model-based
approaches [19] [20] first solve a bi-level optimization problem
to identify the model parameter and then forecast the fu-
ture demand response behaviors of buildings. For data-driven
approaches, reference [21] employs the Gaussian process to
model the demand response of a building with energy storage.
[22] builds a neural network to model customer’s demand
response behaviors.
The most relevant research is the energy storage model
identification [23] [24], which aims to identify the unknown
parameters of the energy storage model and uses a pre-built
price predictor to forecast the energy storage behavior based
on the identified model. On the one hand, knowing the actual
price predictor the energy storage owner uses is difficult.
Instead, the system operator usually can only observe the
historical energy storage behaviors. On the other hand, the
price predictor mainly focuses on predicting the mean value of
the price trend but falls short of capturing the price variations.
The behaviors of energy storage arbitrage are based on the
price spread instead of the true price value. Therefore, simply
feeding the price prediction into the optimization model may
not predict the energy storage behavior well. Compared to
the energy storage model identification approaches in [23]
and [24], our method can infer dynamics of price forecasting
directly from historical energy storage decisions. It then uses
the predicted reward to estimate future energy storage behav-
ior. Alternatively, one could directly build a neural network
to map input features to observed energy storage behaviors.
However, such approaches fail to account for the optimization
structure of energy storage, leading to degraded prediction
performance.
C. Decision-Focused Learning
Decision-focused learning has gained increasing interest in
overcoming the limitations of the MPC-type methods in which
the prediction model often fails to leverage the structural infor-
mation by the optimization constraints and objective functions.
One approach is a smart predict-then-optimize framework that
integrates optimization into the prediction model and develops
a decision-focused surrogate loss function [25], [26]. This line
of research requires the ground truth prediction information
for the model training. Another promising line of research
is the learning-by-experience approach [27], [28]. Without
costly labeled ground truth prediction data, this method only
requires optimal decision information and shows its efficacy
in addressing vehicle routing problems.
Energy storage models have mixed cost terms, including
linear and quadratic costs, along with charging/discharging
dynamics governed by state-of-charge evolution. The afore-
mentioned methods mainly focus on linear cost functions and
lack consideration for the unique characteristics of energy

3
storage systems. While existing work [7] extends the smart
predict-then-optimize paradigm to energy storage arbitrage
problems, they do not consider degradation costs and depend
on perfect forecasting pricing data for model training. Our
approach distinguishes [7] by only requiring energy storage
decisions rather than relying on ground truth prediction data
for training model. This is particular helpful for the scenar-
ios where the ground truth prediction data is not available.
Therefore, we broaden the applicability of decision-focused
learning, making it adaptable to various scenarios and offering
a more comprehensive solution for strategic energy storage
applications.
III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION
We first introduce the storage model and the baseline MPC
framework, then formulate the learning problem.
A. Energy Storage Arbitrage Model
We consider a model-predictive control (MPC) type storage
arbitrage controller in which the storage operator uses a
pre-trained model g(x) to generate price predictions using
historical features x, and then the storage model makes the
optimal arbitrage decisions by solving (1).
(¯pt,¯bt) ∈ argmax
pt,bt∈X
TX
t=1
λt(pt − bt) − u(pt, bt) , λ = g(x)
(1a)
s.t. 0 ≤ pt, bt ≤ P (1b)
pt = 0 if λt < 0 (1c)
0 ≤ et ≤ E (1d)
et − et−1 = −pt/η + btη (1e)
where pt and bt are discharge and charge power at time t,
while ¯pt and ¯bt are the optimized storage dispatch decisions.
T is the time horizon. λt is the predicted real-time price. et
is the state-of-charge (SoC). P is the power rating of storage.
η is the storage efficiency. E is the SoC capacity. u(pt, bt) is
the charge/discharge cost term and it is a convex function over
pt, bt. For example, u(pt, bt) = C1pt + C2p2
t + C3bt + C4b2
t
models the linear and quadratic discharging cost. The objective
of the arbitrage model is to maximize its profit while keeping
the charge/discharge decision within the physical constraints.
(1b) sets the upper and lower bounds for the charge and
discharge power. As noted in [29], constraint (1c) is a convex
relaxation of the non-convex constraint ptbt = 0 that prevents
simultaneous charging and discharging in energy storage.
The non-convex constraint can also be convexified with a
small error, as shown in [30]. (1d) sets the upper and lower
bounds for SoC. (1e) models the SoC evolution process. In
the following, we denote the constraints in (1b)-(1e) as the
feasibility set X .
B. Problem Statement
Our algorithm aims to infer the hidden reward ˆλ that
steers the storage operation to achieve the observed energy
storage strategy (charge/discharge decisions). Subsequently,
we use this predicted reward to imitate the observed strategy
in future energy storage decisions. In particular, our goal is
to establish an end-to-end mapping for predicting forthcoming
energy storage decisions. The model parameters are iteratively
updated by minimizing a defined loss function,
min
θ
L

g(x), (¯pt,¯bt)

(2a)
ˆpt,ˆbt = hθ(ˆx|θ) (2b)
where x denotes the historical features for training the learning
model. ˆx denotes the input features for predicting the storage
behavior. The pair (¯pt,¯bt) denotes the observed storage deci-
sions. The set θ contains all the parameters in the proposed
end-to-end framework. L denotes the loss function for learning
the mapping.
Remark 1. Energy Storage Arbitrage. For the energy storage
arbitrage, our algorithm’s objective is to infer the hidden
reward and imitate these optimal strategies for future arbitrage
decisions. We use historical electricity prices to generate
optimal arbitrage decisions by solving (1), then use the optimal
decisions as training inputs.
Remark 2. Energy Storage Behavior Prediction. For the
energy storage behavior prediction, we take the perspective of
a regulator to understand and predict the charge and discharge
pattern of a particular storage unit given the observed past
storage actions ¯pt,¯bt and the historical features (prices) x.
We do not assume knowledge of future price predictions λ
that the storage used to optimize its operation.
Our algorithm aims to infer the hidden reward ˆλ that
steers the storage operation from the historical energy storage
decisions and then uses the predicted reward to obtain the
future energy storage behavior prediction. In particular, our
objective is to establish an end-to-end mapping for predicting
future energy storage decisions.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
Inspired by the MPC control design used in real-world
storage arbitrage controls, our framework consists of two
components: the prediction layer and the optimization layer.
The prediction layer takes the historical feature as the input
and outputs the reward. The pipeline embeds the optimization
layer as an additional layer. Therefore, this additional layer
must support the forward and backward pass to make it
compatible with the prediction layer. The idea of our proposed
approach is illustrated in Fig. 1. In the following, we will first
detail the prediction layer and the optimization layer and then
introduce the learning process.
A. The Prediction Layer and the Optimization Layer
Given the input feature x ∈ RT ×l, where T is the length of
time series, and l is the number of different types of features.
We build the prediction layer based on deep learning neural
networks; this layer’s output is the reward prediction. The
neural network is parameterized by the weight w,
ˆλ = gw(x) (3)

4
Fig. 1: The pipeline of proposed decision-focused prediction approach. Given the input features, the neural network-based predictor first
predicts the hidden reward. Subsequently, the optimization layer utilizes this hidden reward to calculate the decision by solving an optimization
problem. The algorithm then conducts backward propagation to update the weights in the predictor, based on a perturbed decision-focused
loss function.
where ˆλ = [ˆλ1, ˆλ2, ..., ˆλT ]T ∈ RT denotes all rewards ˆλt in
time horizon T . The gw(.) can be any differentiable predictor.
In our experiments, we adopt a neural network model as our
predictor. As energy storage behaviors strongly correlate with
electricity prices and demand, we can include the previous
days’ day-ahead price (DAP), real-time price (RTP), and
demand data as the input features.
After the hidden reward ˆλ is predicted, the formulation in
equation (1) is employed to obtain the storage decisions. The
optimization layer f is therefore defined as:
f : ˆλ 7→ argmax
pt,bt∈X
{
TX
t=1
ˆλt(pt − bt) − u(pt, bt)} (4)
To simplify the notation, we add additional constraints yt =
pt − bt in X and consider a more general model,
f : ˆλ 7→ argmax
yt∈X
{
TX
t=1
ˆλtyt − u(yt)} = argmax
y∈X
{ˆλT y − u(y)}
(5)
where y = [ y1, y2, ..., yT ]T ∈ RT represents the charge and
discharge decisions (pt, bt), t = 1 , 2, ..., T. u(y) denotes the
total cost: u(y) =PT
t=1 u(yt). Specifically, the maximization
problem is defined as F (ˆλ) = max
y∈X
{ˆλT y − u(y)} and the
corresponding optimal solution is y∗(ˆλ) = argmax
y∈X
{ˆλT y −
u(y)}. Then the end-to-end policy which maps the input
features to the energy storage behaviors is defined as:
x 7→ y = f(gw(x)) (6)
B. The Learning Approach
To ensure good performance with the proposed algorithm, it
is crucial to compute the weights of the predictor in a manner
that aligns the prediction y close to the target energy storage
decision ¯y. The learning approach involves training a decision-
focused end-to-end framework to follow the decisions taken
by an unknown policy.
Dataset. Our learning problem is in a supervised setting
and we build a dataset as follows,
D = {(x1, ¯y1), (x2, ¯y2), ...,(xn, ¯yn)} (7)
where x denotes the input features, and x includes historical
price and/or demand data. ¯y denotes the target energy storage
decisions. n is the number of data samples in the dataset.
For the energy storage arbitrage problem, {¯y1, ¯y2, ..., ¯yn}
represents the optimal arbitrage decisions generated from
historical real-time prices. For the behavior prediction prob-
lem, {¯y1, ¯y2, ..., ¯yn} represents the historical observed energy
storage behaviors.
In order to achieve optimal performance of the prediction of
energy storage decisions, it is essential to design an efficient
loss function to update the weights w of the neural network.
This ensures that the prediction of energy storage decisions
aligns closely with the target storage decisions.
Learning problem. The learning problem is to find the
optimal w∗ such that the loss function L(.) is minimized over
the training dataset D.
w∗ = argmin
w
nX
i=1
L(gw(xi), ¯yi) (8)
To ensure the prediction follows the target energy storage de-
cisions, it is natural to define a decision-focused loss function
such that the computed charge/discharge decisions result in
the same profit as the target decisions. Then given estimated
reward ˆλ, the target charge and discharge decisions ¯y, the
decision-focused loss function is defined as
LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y) = max
y∈X
{ˆλT y − u(y)} − (ˆλ¯y − u(¯y))
= {ˆλT y∗(ˆλ) − u(y∗(ˆλ))} − (ˆλ¯y − u(¯y))
(9)
where ¯y represents the set of target charge and discharge
decisions yt, t = 1 , 2, ..., T. ˆλT denotes the transpose of ˆλ.
It is clear that LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y) ≥ 0 as y∗(ˆλ) is the maximizer
given ˆλ. The equality LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y) = 0 holds only when
y∗(ˆλ) = ¯y. Unfortunately, the loss function in (9) is not
continuous because y∗(ˆλ) may not be continuous in ˆλ [25]
[28]. The discontinuity poses computation difficulties when
applying backpropagation to update the weights. We employ
the perturbation idea in reference [28] by perturbing the reward
ˆλ with additive noise. Then the perturbed optimizer is:
fϵ : ˆλ → E[argmax
y∈X
(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)] (10)

5
where Z is additive Gaussian noise N (0, I). ϵ is a positive
scaling parameter. E[.] denotes taking the expectation over the
variable Z. The perturbed maximization problem is defined as
Fϵ(ˆλ) = E[max
y∈X
(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)], and the corresponding
optimal solution is y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) = E[argmax
y∈X
(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)].
Thus, the perturbed loss function is defined as:
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) = E[max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)}] − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y))
(11)
C. Convex and Smooth Perturbed Loss Function
We will show in the following Propositions that the per-
turbed loss function is both convex and smooth, which would
facilitate efficient training in the learning pipeline. Our work
is motivated by recent work [28]. Due to the space limit, we
provide detailed proofs to all propositions in the Appendix
[31]1.
Proposition 1. The differentiablity of perturbed function. As
noise Z is from Gaussian distribution, it has the density
ρ(Z) ∝ exp(−ψ(Z)). For RX = max
y∈X
||y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)||, we have
• Fϵ(ˆλ) is differentiable, and ∇ˆλFϵ(ˆλ) = y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) =
E[y∗(ˆλ + ϵZ)] = E[F (ˆλ + ϵZ)∇Zψ(Z)/ϵ].
• Fϵ(ˆλ) is Lipschitz continuous, and ||Fϵ(ˆλ) − Fϵ(˜λ)|| ≤
RX ||ˆλ − ˜λ||.
where ∝ denotes “proportional to.” Proposition 1 proves
that Fϵ(ˆλ) is differentiable and Lipschitz continuous, we
demonstrate that by adding appropriate Gaussian noise Z, the
perturbed function becomes differentiable with respect to ˆλ.
The non-differentiability issue in the non-perturbed problem
(4) arises from the linear energy storage model, where linear
programming often involves a piecewise linear structure. The
solution from the linear energy storage model typically lies
on the vertices of a polytope. Consequently, small changes
in the input price predictions can cause abrupt shifts in the
solutions, leading to non-differentiability of the correspond-
ing loss function. Adding perturbation smooths these abrupt
transitions and ensures the perturbed optimization function
Fϵ(ˆλ) differentiable. The equations from the first statement of
Proposition 1 will be used in subsequent proofs. The Lipschitz
continuity of Fϵ(ˆλ) helps establish the Lipschitz continuity
of ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) in Proposition 4. The Lipschitz continuity
ensures that the function does not change abruptly and the
function is continuous. Given the perturbation, we aim to
understand the impact of ϵ and how the optimal solution y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)
behaves as ϵ varies. Consequently, we introduce Proposition
2:
Proposition 2. Impact of scaling factor ϵ.
• y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) is in the interior of X .
• For ˆλ such that y∗(ˆλ) is a unique maximizer: when ϵ →
∞, y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) → y∗
1(
ˆλ
ϵ ) = ϵE[argmax
y∈X
{Z T y}]; when ϵ → 0,
y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) → y∗(ˆλ).
1The Appendix can be found at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.17085
Proposition 2 indicates that the perturbed solution y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)
remains feasible. If y∗(ˆλ) is a unique maximizer, as ϵ → 0,
y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) converges to the original optimal solution y∗(ˆλ).
Conversely, as ϵ → ∞ , y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) deviates from the original
solution y∗(ˆλ) and approaches y∗
1(
ˆλ
ϵ ). Since Z is drawn from
a zero-mean Gaussian distribution, y∗
1(
ˆλ
ϵ ) converges to a zero
vector. In the context of our energy storage model, as ϵ tends
to infinity, it implies that the energy storage system remains
inactive and does not take any action.
This proposition implies that we should carefully select the
scaling factor ϵ. A very small ϵ may not ensure sufficient
smoothness of the loss function, while a very large ϵ may
cause the solution to deviate significantly from the original
optimal solution. In our experimental setup, ϵ is set between
1 and 10.
Proposition 3. The property of perturbed loss function
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y).
• LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is a convex function of ˆλ.
• 0 ≤ L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y) ≤ T P ϵ.
where T represents the length of the prediction horizon, and P
represents the power rating. The left inequality in the second
statement implies that the perturbed loss function serves as
an upper bound for the original loss function, LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y) ≤
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y). The right inequality indicates that the distance
between these two loss functions is bounded by the scaling
factor ϵ. As ϵ → 0, these two inequalities together imply the
convergence LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) → L F Y (ˆλ, ¯y).
Proposition 4. Gradient of perturbed loss function.
• The gradient of the perturbed loss function is
∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) = y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y. (12)
• ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is Lipschitz continuous.
Equation (12) shows that the perturbed loss function has a
convenient gradient, which can be computed by solving for
the optimal solution and subtracting ¯y. Lipschitz continuity
ensures that the gradient changes smoothly, which is beneficial
for training the learning problem. Hence, we have shown that
the perturbed loss function is both convex and smooth.
Convergence Analysis of the Optimization Layer: As shown
in later equation (17), the total gradient with respect to
the network weights w relies on the chain rule. However,
conducting a comprehensive convergence analysis is beyond
the scope of this paper as it requires several assumptions
regarding neural networks to complete the proof. Without loss
of generality, we focus on the perturbed optimization layer
and consider LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) as a function of ˆλ. Given that
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is a convex function of ˆλ in Proposition 3, and
∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is Lipschitz continuous in Proposition 4, we
provide a convergence analysis for the optimization layer in
Appendix.
D. Algorithmic Implementation
Since the exact computation of the expectation in (11) is
generally intractable, we approximate it using Monte Carlo

6
sampling in the solution algorithm implementation. Monte
Carlo sampling approximates expectations by averaging over
K number of random samples. The perturbed loss function is
approximated as:
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)
≈ 1
K
KX
m=1
[max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ(m))T y − u(y)}] − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y))
(13)
where K is the number of Monte-Carlo samples. The gradient
∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is computed as follows:
∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) = y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y
= E[argmax
y∈X
(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)] − ¯y
≈ 1
K
KX
m=1
[argmax
y∈X
(ˆλ + ϵZ(m))T y − u(y)] − ¯y
(14)
Given that the unknown predictor is designed to forecast
real-time prices, we can guide the inferred reward to align
with the price information by leveraging it as prior knowledge.
To achieve this, we introduce a predictor regularizer, which
minimizes the mean squared error (MSE) between the reward
and the price. The price data may consist of either previous
days’ real-time prices or day-ahead prices. Consequently, the
total loss function is constructed as the weighted sum of the
perturbed loss LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) and the MSE loss. This hybrid
loss function is defined as:
Lϵ(ˆλ, ¯y) = LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) + β
TX
t=1
(ˆλt − ξt)2 (15)
The parameter β represents the weighted factor of the MSE
loss, and ξt corresponds to the RTP or DAP from the previous
day, serving as one of the features in xt. The total subgradient
is then computed as:
∇Lϵ(ˆλ, ¯y) = y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y + 2β(ˆλ − ξ)
≈ 1
K
KX
m=1
[argmax
y∈X
(ˆλ + ϵZ(m))T y − u(y)] − ¯y+
2β(ˆλ − ξ)
(16)
For the backward propagation, we apply the chain rule to
compute the total gradient with respect to the weights w of
predictors,
∇wLϵ(ˆλ, ¯y) = ∇Lϵ(ˆλ, ¯y) · ∂ ˆλ
∂w (17)
where the term ∂ˆλ
∂w represents the Jacobian of reward pre-
diction with respect to the weights w. The Jacobian can be
computed using automatic differentiation [32] in a standard
deep learning framework. The details of behavior prediction
are outlined in Algorithm 1. The energy storage arbitrage
follows a similar process as described in Algorithm 2. Due
to space limitations, Algorithm 2 is moved to the Appendix
[31]. Readers can refer to the Appendix [31] for more details.
Algorithm 1 The Prediction of Strategic Energy Storage
Behavior
Require: The time horizon T ; The power rating P of energy
storage; The SoC efficiency η and capacity E; The maxi-
mum epochs Mmax; The cost coefficients in u(pt, bt); The
training data D = {(x1, ¯y1), (x2, ¯y2), ...,(xn, ¯yn)}; The
testing data ˆD = {ˆx1, ˆx2, ..., ˆxn}.
1: Initialization: The weights w of predictor gw(x) are
randomly initialized.
Training stage:
2: for Epochs < Mmax do
3: for Each batch in D do
4: Predict the reward using the predictor ˆλ = gw(x);
5: Forward pass to compute the optimal decisions
p∗
t , b∗
t , t = 1, 2, ..., T by equation (1);
6: Compute the loss Lϵ(ˆλ, ¯y) by equation (15);
7: Compute the total gradient by equation (17) and
backward pass to update the weights w of predictor.;
8: end for
9: end for
Prediction stage:
10: Predict the reward using the predictor ˆλ = gw(ˆx);
11: Forward pass to compute the optimal decisions ˆpt,ˆbt, t =
1, 2, ..., T by equation (1);
12: return The predicted energy storage behaviors (ˆpt,ˆbt)
for t = 1, 2, ...T.
V. E XPERIMENTS
The experiments are implemented in Python 3, Pytorch [33]
and PyEPO package [34] on a desktop with 3.0 GHz Intel Core
i9, NVIDIA 4080 16 GB Graphic card, and 32 GB RAM. The
optimization layer is implemented using the Groubi optimiza-
tion package [35]. The pre-built predictor is implemented in
Keras [36] and Tensorflow [37]. The computational time for
reward prediction and optimization is less than 0.1 seconds.
The parameters for the energy storage arbitrage model are
set as follows: power rating P = 0.5M W, storage efficiency
η = 0 .9, initial SoC e0 = 0 .5M W h, storage capacity E =
2M W h, prediction horizon T = 24. The number of Monte-
Carlo samples is K = 1.
In this paper, we employ two neural network models: a
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network and a Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) network. The LSTM model architecture
includes a single LSTM layer, followed by two fully connected
layers with a hidden dimension of 64. A ReLU activation
function is applied after each fully connected layer. For the
MLP model, the architecture consists of three fully connected
layers, each with a hidden dimension of 96, with ReLU
as the activation function. The Adam optimizer is used for
model training. The learning rate is set as 0.01. The input
features, such as demand and price data, are structured as
time-series historical data, enabling the model to effectively
capture temporal dependencies. The neural network outputs
a time series of reward predictions, while the optimization
layer generates energy storage decisions that align with the
reward prediction horizon. In our experiments, we used a 24-

7
hour look-back window as input, and the model predicts the
reward and corresponding storage decisions for the subsequent
24-hour period.
A. Self-Scheduling Energy Storage Arbitrage
We conduct experiments focusing on Behind-the-Meter
energy storage arbitrage, where the energy storage system
autonomously manages its scheduling based on future price
predictions at hourly real-time prices [13]. The reward fore-
casting horizon spans 24 hours and is updated hourly. There-
fore, the corresponding energy storage schedule is dynamically
adjusted on an hourly basis. We collect data from the New
York Independent System Operator (NYISO), using data from
2017-2020 for training and 2021 for testing. The historical
data for Real-Time Price (RTP), Day-Ahead Price (DAP), and
load data are collected. The data resolution is one sample
per hour. The dataset includes both input features and target
decision values. The target decisions are obtained by solving
(1) using ground truth RTP. The input features consist of three
components: RTP, DAP, and load data. These input features are
typical for training a price forecaster. To augment the training
samples in the dataset, a rolling horizon window with a step
size of one hour is employed. The input features of the training
dataset are structured as a tensor of size 35017×24×3, where
35017 represents the number of samples, 24 corresponds to
hourly intervals, and 3 denotes the number of feature types.
The target decision data is represented as a 35017×24 matrix.
The testing dataset follows the same format, comprising 8713
samples.
The arbitrage profit is computed as
PT
t=1
¯λt(p∗
t − b∗
t ) − u(p∗
t , b∗
t ) (18)
where ¯λt denotes the real-time price at time t; p∗
t and b∗
t denote
the scheduled discharge and charge at time t, respectively.
The goal of this experiment is to compare the proposed
decision-focused approach with several data-driven benchmark
approaches to demonstrate that training with our decision-
focused loss leads to increased profit. We compare the
cumulative profit over the entire year of 2021 and show
the performance improvements achieved by our method. We
employ the MLP as our prediction layer. We compare the
arbitrage performance of the proposed method with two MPC-
based benchmark methods. The first benchmark employs an
LSTM network for real-time price prediction, while the second
employs an MLP network. For brevity, we denote these two
methods as “LSTM-MPC” and “MLP-MPC”, respectively. We
also include a benchmark method based on reinforcement
learning (RL) [14], which employs a Markov decision process
(MDP) framework by discretizing the SoC. The original RL
approach assumes perfect energy storage efficiency ( η = 1).
To ensure a fair comparison, we revised the RL approach by
incorporating the SoC transition into the state transition of the
RL framework and set the storage efficiency of all methods to
0.9. We test two types of energy storage models to evaluate the
performance of our proposed method: one with a linear cost
term and the other with both linear and quadratic cost terms.
The linear cost term is u(pt, bt) = C1pt, where the coefficient
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: Comparison of annual accumulative profits between the
proposed approach and three benchmark methods. The energy storage
model is with (a) linear cost term, (b) linear and quadratic cost terms.
of discharge cost is C1 = 10. The linear and quadratic cost
terms are u(pt, bt) = C1pt + C2p2
t , where the coefficients of
discharge cost are C1 = 5 and C2 = 5.
Note that the self-scheduling energy storage arbitrage setting
in this paper is more challenging than the economic bidding
or price response settings in [10]. Economic bidding assumes
that energy storage can submit a bid, and the market clears
it based on the price at time t. Price response assumes that
the price at the time step t can be observed before making
decisions at t. However, self-scheduling arbitrage in this paper
requires making decisions at t before the real-time price
at t is published. Consequently, this self-scheduling setting
encounters more uncertainties and leads to lower profits than
the other two settings. The accumulative arbitrage profits are
plotted on a yearly basis.
Fig. 2 shows the arbitrage performance of the proposed
method and the three benchmark methods with the two consid-
ered cost terms. The mean absolute error (MAE) of the MLP
model is 10.83, while the MAE of the LSTM model is 9.31.
Although the lower MAE of the LSTM indicates better overall
prediction accuracy compared to the MLP, the MLP model
performs better in terms of profit. This is because the MLP
predicts the price peak timing more accurately, a crucial factor
for optimizing energy storage arbitrage. The proposed method
consistently outperforms the three benchmark methods. Our
proposed method demonstrates a performance improvement of
approximately 47%, 71%, and 50% over the three benchmark
methods with linear cost and 30%, 38%, and 72% with

8
Table I: The comparison of accumulative profits with different energy
storage efficiency with linear cost.
η 1 0.95 0.9 0.85
Proposed 9126 6381 4589 2990
MLP-MPC 8388 5545 3121 1332
LSTM-MPC 6910 4554 2583 1233
linear and quadratic cost. Our end-to-end pipeline, which
incorporates the optimization model and focuses on decision
error, contributes to its profit improvement. The results in the
two sub-figures also demonstrate that our proposed method is
robust across different energy storage cost models.
We vary the energy storage efficiency and show the corre-
sponding profits in Table I. The profits decrease as the effi-
ciency decreases for all three methods. The proposed method
achieves 5%-20% profit improvement over the two benchmark
methods when η = 1 . In contrast, for η = 0 .85, the profits
of the proposed method are more than double those of the
two benchmark methods. Unlike the two benchmark methods,
which treat prediction and optimization as two separate stages,
the proposed method incorporates the SoC evolution into the
end-to-end pipeline. The results in Table I demonstrate that the
proposed method is more robust to varying storage efficiencies,
highlighting its superiority.
In Fig. 3, we present the predictions of the proposed method,
LSTM, and MLP models, and the ground truth real-time price
(RTP) over two consecutive days. We also show the corre-
sponding energy storage decisions based on these predictions.
As shown in Fig. 3, while the reward predictions from all three
methods exhibit similar trends, our method provides more
accurate timing of price spikes, resulting in the best decision-
making outcomes. The energy storage behavior from our
method aligns closely with the optimal decisions. In contrast,
the decisions generated by the LSTM and MLP models deviate
from the optimal decisions and show larger errors. The profits
for this segment are $363, $220, and $204 for our method,
MLP method, and LSTM method, respectively.
To assess the adaptability of the proposed method to a new
energy storage system, we employ an energy storage system
with parameters η = 0 .95, E = 1 , P = 0 .5, C1 = 10 ,
and C2 = 0. A reward predictor is trained using the optimal
decisions generated by this energy storage model. The trained
predictor is then applied to a different model with parameters
η = 0.9, E = 2, P = 0.5, C1 = 5, and C2 = 5. The arbitrage
profit achieved through adaptation is $4,783, compared to
$5,314 from the original model. We abbreviate the proposed
method, trained on a storage system with different parameters,
as “Proposed-Adapt.” The performance comparison in Fig. 4
shows that the algorithm adapts effectively to the new model,
with only a minor reduction in profit. This demonstrates
the robustness of the trained predictor in handling variations
in system parameters while maintaining competitive perfor-
mance.
B. Energy Storage Behavior Prediction
The prediction of energy storage behavior involves predict-
ing the charge and discharge patterns of an energy storage unit
Fig. 3: Comparison of reward predictions and corresponding deci-
sions between the proposed approach, two benchmark methods, and
ground truth. The first subfigure shows the reward predictions and the
ground truth real-time price (RTP). The subsequent subfigures show
the corresponding decisions compared to the optimal decisions.
Fig. 4: Arbitrage performance based on training on the original
energy storage system and on a storage system with different pa-
rameters.
based on observed energy storage actions and input features.
To evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm, we
compared it with two benchmark prediction methods. The first
benchmark algorithm trains an LSTM network to learn a non-
linear mapping between input features and charge/discharge

9
decisions. This mapping resembles the one in (6) but removes
the optimization layer. It can be expressed as,
x 7→ y = gw(x) (19)
We denote the first algorithm as its neural network type
“LSTM” for brevity. The second algorithm is a two-stage
approach and assumes a pre-built predictor. After predicting
real-time price, the price predictions are fed into the storage
optimization problem defined in equation (1). Due to its two-
stage nature, we abbreviate this method as “Two-Stage.”
The goal of this experiment is to demonstrate that the
proposed decision-focused framework improves the accuracy
of predicting energy storage behavior. The LSTM method
does not incorporate the energy storage model during training.
The two-stage method separates prediction and energy storage
optimization into separate parts, training the prediction model
solely to minimize the price prediction error without consid-
ering the observed charge/discharge behaviors. Our proposed
method integrates the energy storage model into the machine
learning pipeline, minimizing decision loss with respect to
observed charge/discharge actions. We evaluate prediction
performance over a full year to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach.
Evaluation Metric. We employ principles of pattern recog-
nition to assess the efficacy of storage behavior predic-
tion models. Our motivation stems from the unique char-
acteristics of storage operations, which are inherently bi-
directional—alternating between charging and discharging
phases—and marked by the action’s sparsity, where the output
of the storage remains at zero for extended durations. Tra-
ditional evaluation metrics, including mean-square error and
correlation coefficients, fall short of accurately capturing the
prediction quality due to these distinct operational dynamics.
We assign the label 1 to the discharge decision, -1 to the
charge decision, and 0 to the standby decision. Predicted
values are classified as 1 if above the threshold, -1 if below
the negative threshold, and 0 if within the range between the
negative threshold and the threshold. The threshold is set at
10%-20% of the power rating. In the synthetic experiment, we
set the threshold to 0.05; in the real-world experiment, we set
it to 0.2. We consider the time delays, and if the prediction and
the ground truth differ by at most 2 hours, we still consider it
correctly classified. The confusion matrix with this criterion is
denoted as the “event-based confusion matrix.” The confusion
matrix is defined in Table II, where TP is true positive; TN is
true negative; FN is false negative; FP is false positive.
Table II: The confusion matrix of energy storage behavior.
Actual | Prediction -1 0 1
-1 TP FN FP
0 FP TN FP
1 FP FN TP
Due to the event-based criterion not considering the mag-
nitude of the prediction, we also introduce a magnitude-based
criterion: if the prediction error for charge/discharge falls
within a certain percentage of magnitude of the actual value,
it is classified as 1 or -1, respectively; otherwise, it is labeled
as 0. In the synthetic experiment, we set the percentage at
20%; in the real-world experiment, we set it at 40%. The time
delays are also accounted for in the magnitude-based criterion.
We denote the confusion matrix with this criterion as the
“magnitude-based confusion matrix.” The evaluation metrics
are defined as:
Precision = TP
TP + FP (20a)
Accuracy = TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN (20b)
Recall = TP
TP + FN (20c)
F1 score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall (20d)
1) Storage Behavior Prediction with Synthetic Data: The
historical data for RTP, DAP, and load data are collected from
NYISO from 2019 to 2022. We use two years for training and
one year for testing. The data resolution is one sample per
hour. The dataset collected for this study comprises both input
features and target decision values. Similar to the application
of energy storage arbitrage, we select typical input features
for a price forecaster, including three types: RTP, DAP, and
load data. The target decisions are the historical energy storage
charge/discharge actions. The input features are structured as
a 730 × 24 × 3 tensor, where 730 represents the number of
samples, 24 corresponds to 24 hourly intervals, and 3 denotes
the feature types. The target decision data is structured as a
730 × 24 matrix. The testing dataset follows the same format
and contains 365 samples. We employ an LSTM network as
our prediction layer. The energy storage arbitrage model in (1)
generates the energy storage behaviors. The governing reward,
i.e., the synthetic price prediction, ˆλ ∈ RT is generated by:
ˆλg
i,t = αi,t ∗ λDA
i,t + (1 − αi,t) ∗ λRT
i,t + ζi,t (21)
where λDA
i,t and λRT
i,t represent the DAP and RTP at time step
t of day i, respectively. ζi,t is the Gaussian noise generated
from N (0, 1). αi,t is the parameter that controls the trade-
off similarity between DAP and RTP. Note that this reward
generation method is motivated by the fact that the expectation
of RAP converges to DAP [38]. We randomly select αi,t from
(0.5,1) in our experiment. The two-stage method constructs a
predictor for RTP based on the same historical data and then
incorporates the prediction into the arbitrage model.
We evaluate the performance of our proposed method using
energy storage behaviors with two cost terms. The settings
for these cost terms are consistent with those described in
Section V-A. The hyperparameter β is set as β = 0 .001.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 7 show the prediction performance of the
proposed method and two benchmark methods. The ground-
truth behaviors and the predictions in four consecutive days
are plotted. The proposed method accurately predicts storage
behaviors regarding time steps and magnitudes. In contrast,
the LSTM method can predict the timing of charge/discharge
decisions but struggles to learn power rating information from
historical data. Additionally, it mispredicts charge/discharge
behaviors during standby periods when energy storage remains
inactive. The two-stage method can capture the power rating

10
Fig. 5: Comparison of ground-truth and predictions from the pro-
posed approach and two benchmark methods: storage model with
linear cost.
but predicts a shorter duration. Additionally, it fails to predict
energy storage activities on the first two days. We show the
price predictions from the two-stage method with the actual
predictions in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 6, there are deviations
between the two-stage predictions and the actual predictions.
While the two-stage method’s predictions follow a similar
overall trend to the actual predictions, the two-stage model
underestimates the price spread during the first two days.
Because the predicted price spread from the two-stage method
is lower than the degradation cost, the storage system remains
idle.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6: Price prediction of the two-stage method and the actual
prediction. (a) Price prediction of two-stage method in Fig. 5; (b)
Price prediction of two-stage method in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7: Comparison of ground-truth and predictions from the pro-
posed approach and two benchmark methods: storage model with
linear and quadratic cost.
The total dispatch energy of ground-truth, the proposed
method and two comparison methods is shown in Fig. 8(a)
and (b). Our proposed method accurately predicts the charge
and discharge energy while the two benchmark methods
have higher errors. This demonstrates the superiority of our
approach.
Table III and Table IV list the number of True Positives
(TP), True Negatives (TN), False Positives (FP), and False
Negatives (FN) along with two types of confusion matrices.
The event-based confusion matrix shows that the proposed
method achieves the highest precision and accuracy. While
the proposed method has lower recall than LSTM, it achieves
much higher precision. The F1 score, which balances preci-
sion and recall, indicates that our method outperforms others
overall. The magnitude-based confusion matrix employs a
more strict criterion. In both tables, the performance of the
LSTM method degrades significantly under this criterion. In
contrast, the F1 score of the proposed method experiences only
a marginal decrease. This indicates that the proposed method
is more adept at accurately predicting the magnitude. The F1
scores in both tables demonstrate that the proposed method
outperforms the other two methods.
Note that the regulator can obtain degradation cost infor-
mation through resource integration registration. Our method
does not rely on prior knowledge of linear cost coefficients,
and the quadratic cost has only a minor influence on pre-
diction accuracy. The algorithm can interpret both linear and
quadratic cost coefficients as part of the reward prediction.
However, because the reward prediction is linearly multiplied
with charge/discharge decisions in the objective function,
the quadratic cost cannot be fully captured, resulting in a
slight impact on prediction accuracy. In such cases, the al-
gorithm can leverage data-driven storage model identification
techniques [24] to estimate the energy storage degradation

11
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 8: Energy dispatch of ground-truth, the proposed approach and two benchmark methods: energy storage behavior with (a) a linear cost
term, (b) linear and quadratic cost terms, and (c) real-world energy storage behavior.
Table III: Comparison of the proposed approach and two benchmark methods, storage behavior with linear cost term.
Event-based confusion matrix Magnitude-based confusion matrix
Metrics TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score
Prop 1463 5878 672 723 68.52% 84.03% 66.93% 67.72% 1235 5808 742 951 62.47% 80.62% 56.50% 59.33%
LSTM 1987 4166 2418 165 45.11% 70.43% 92.33% 60.61% 132 4004 2580 2020 4.87% 47.34% 6.13% 5.43%
Two-Stage 943 6015 548 1230 63.25% 79.65% 43.40% 51.47% 787 6034 529 1386 59.80% 78.08% 36.22% 45.11%
Table IV: Comparison of the proposed approach and two benchmark methods, storage behavior with linear and quadratic cost term.
Event-based confusion matrix Magnitude-based confusion matrix
Metrics TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score
Prop 2327 4796 1018 595 69.57% 81.54% 79.64% 74.26% 1252 4944 870 1670 59% 70.92% 42.85% 49.64%
LSTM 2577 3647 2242 270 53.48% 71.25% 90.52% 67.23% 228 3518 2371 2619 8.77% 42.88% 8.01% 8.37%
Two-Stage 1430 5195 629 1482 69.45% 75.84% 49.11% 57.53% 906 5198 626 2006 59.14% 69.87% 31.11% 40.77%
Table V: Comparison of the proposed approach and two benchmark methods on real-world data.
Event-based confusion matrix Magnitude-based confusion matrix
Metrics TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score
Prop 792 4252 352 364 69.23% 87.57% 68.51% 68.87% 602 4272 332 554 64% 84.62% 52.08% 57.61%
LSTM 609 4297 293 561 67.52% 85.17% 52.05% 58.78% 345 4299 291 825 54.25% 80.62% 29.49% 38.21%
MLP 764 4024 580 392 56.85% 83.12% 66.09% 61.12% 367 4060 544 789 40.29% 76.86% 31.75% 35.51%
Fig. 9: Comparison of ground-truth and predictions from the pro-
posed approach and two benchmark methods: real-world data.
quadratic cost term based on inferred pricing dynamics from
our approach.
In Fig. 5 and Fig. 7, C1 = 10 for linear case and C1 = 5
and C2 = 5 for linear and quadratic case. In Fig. 10, we do not
assume that the degradation cost is known in our optimization
model. We set C1 = 0 in our model for the linear cost case. For
the linear and quadratic cost case, we set C1 = 0 and C2 = 0.
The results, shown in the Fig. 10 and Table VI, indicate that the
algorithm achieves similar performance to the case where the
ground truth cost terms are assumed. The algorithm accurately
predicts the energy storage model under a linear cost. For
energy storage with linear and quadratic costs, our method
correctly predicts the timing of charge and discharge, with
only minor errors in discharge predictions. This demonstrates
that our algorithm is not sensitive to prior knowledge of the
cost function.
2) Storage Behavior Prediction with Real-World Data: We
conduct experiments on public energy storage data in 2020
from Queensland University. The Tesla Powerpack battery
system has a 1.1 MW power rating and a 2.2 MWh capacity.
The battery system is controlled by a demand response engine
and engages in two major revenue activities: arbitrage and
Frequency Control Ancillary Services (FCAS). According to

12
Table VI: The performance of the proposed approach without assuming knowledge of the degradation cost, storage behavior with linear cost
term and linear and quadratic cost term.
Event-based confusion matrix Magnitude-based confusion matrix
Metrics TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score TP TN FP FN Precision Accuracy Recall F1 score
Linear Cost 1840 5116 1435 345 56.18% 79.62% 84.21% 67.40% 1608 5137 1414 577 53.21% 77.21% 73.59% 61.76%
Linear and Quadratic2197 4751 1082 706 67.00% 79.53% 75.68% 71.08% 1623 4639 1194 1280 57.61% 71.68% 55.91% 56.75%
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10: Prediction performance of the proposed method without
assuming knowledge of the cost term. Storage behavior with (a) linear
cost; (b) linear and quadratic cost.
its performance report [39], the battery system only had a 2-
hour duration of FCAS in 2020. Therefore, energy storage
behaviors are dominated by storage arbitrage. Some days
did not have charging/discharging activities due to internet
connection issues. Historical energy storage behaviors also
have missing data issues for several days. These days are
removed from the training and testing data. Six months of data
are used for training, and three months of data are used for
testing. The data resolution is one sample every 30 minutes.
We include RTP data as input features. The input features are
structured as a 170 × 96 × 1 tensor, where 170 represents the
number of samples, 96 corresponds to half-hourly intervals,
and 1 denotes the feature type. The target decision data is
structured as a 170 × 24 matrix. The testing dataset follows
the same format and contains 70 samples.
The parameters of the energy storage arbitrage model are set
as follows: power rating P = 1.11M W, storage efficiency η =
0.9, storage capacity E = 2 .2M W h, the prediction horizon
T = 96, we assume the energy storage behavior has a linear
cost term and a quadratic cost term u(pt, bt) = C1pt + C2p2
t ,
where the coefficients of discharge cost is set as C1 = 5 ,
C2 = 3 . The hybrid loss parameter β = 0 .01. Note that
predicting real-world energy storage behaviors is inherently
challenging. First, complete knowledge of model parameters,
such as prediction horizon and strategy, is unavailable. Second,
our algorithm requires the SoC to be consistent across days,
but data quality issues lead to some days being excluded,
complicating the learning process. The stochastic nature of
real-world energy storage adds further difficulty for accurate
behavior predictions. Despite all these challenges, our method
consistently outperforms the benchmark methods on this real-
world dataset.
We compare the proposed method with the first comparison
algorithm, using two types of neural networks, LSTM and
MLP. Fig. 9 shows the prediction performance of the proposed
method and the benchmark methods. The proposed method
captures the trend and magnitude in ground-truth energy
storage behaviors, albeit with some time deviations. Although
the LSTM method predicts discharge decisions well, it con-
sistently fails to predict the magnitude of charge decisions.
The MLP method can approximately predict the timing of
charge/discharge decisions, but it consistently struggles to
predict their magnitude. Hence, the practical applicability of
these two methods is highly constrained.
Table V lists the confusion matrices and corresponding
metrics. Table V shows that the proposed method achieves
the best performance for all metrics. Fig. 8(c) shows the total
dispatch energy for the proposed and comparison methods.
Our method slightly over-predicts charge and discharge energy,
while the two benchmark methods exhibit much higher predic-
tion errors. These results underscore the substantial advantage
of the proposed method.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper introduces a decision-focused approach that
integrates the physical energy storage model into a neural
network-based architecture. Our method incorporates prior
knowledge from the storage arbitrage model and infers the
hidden reward that guides energy storage decisions. We pro-
vide theoretical analysis for the perturbed loss function. To
facilitate effective training, we propose a novel hybrid loss
function. We demonstrate our proposed framework on two
energy storage applications: the self-scheduling energy storage
arbitrage problem and the energy storage behavior prediction
problem. Numerical results on both applications underscore
the significant advantages of our proposed method. In future
work, we plan to extend our decision-focused framework
to strategic energy storage operation under a price-maker
scenario, incorporating a grid-based model and accounting
for the storage system’s influence on market prices. We will
also explore incorporating grid losses [30] into our framework.
Additionally, we will integrate our approach into behind-the-
meter energy disaggregation for energy storage.
REFERENCES
[1] U. E. I. Administration, “U.s. battery storage capacity expected to nearly
double in 2024,” , 2023.

13
[2] F. E. R. Commission, “Order no. 841,” , 2018.
[3] S. M. Harvey and W. W. Hogan, “Market power and withholding,”
Harvard Univ., Cambridge, MA , 2001.
[4] N. Zheng, Q. Xin, W. Di, G. Murtaugh, and B. Xu, “Energy storage
state-of-charge market model,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Markets,
Policy and Regulation, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11–22, 2023.
[5] R. Sioshansi, P. Denholm, J. Arteaga, S. Awara, S. Bhattacharjee, A. Bot-
terud, W. Cole, A. Cortes, A. De Queiroz, J. DeCarolis et al., “Energy-
storage modeling: State-of-the-art and future research directions,” IEEE
transactions on power systems , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 860–875, 2021.
[6] Z. Zhou, N. Zheng, R. Zhang, and B. Xu, “Energy storage market power
withholding bounds in real-time markets,” in Proceedings of the 15th
ACM International Conference on Future Energy Systems , 2024.
[7] L. Sang, Y . Xu, H. Long, Q. Hu, and H. Sun, “Electricity price prediction
for energy storage system arbitrage: A decision-focused approach,”IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 2822–2832, 2022.
[8] Y . Wang, Y . Dvorkin, R. Fernández-Blanco, B. Xu, T. Qiu, and D. S.
Kirschen, “Look-ahead bidding strategy for energy storage,” IEEE
Transactions on Sustainable Energy, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1106–1117, 2017.
[9] D. R. Jiang and W. B. Powell, “An approximate dynamic programming
algorithm for monotone value functions,” Operations research, vol. 63,
no. 6, pp. 1489–1511, 2015.
[10] Y . Baker, N. Zheng, and B. Xu, “Transferable energy storage bidder,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 2023.
[11] D. R. Jiang and W. B. Powell, “Optimal hour-ahead bidding in the real-
time electricity market with battery storage using approximate dynamic
programming,” INFORMS Journal on Computing , vol. 27, no. 3, pp.
525–543, 2015.
[12] K. Abdulla, J. De Hoog, V . Muenzel, F. Suits, K. Steer, A. Wirth,
and S. Halgamuge, “Optimal operation of energy storage systems
considering forecasts and battery degradation,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 2086–2096, 2016.
[13] H. Chitsaz, P. Zamani-Dehkordi, H. Zareipour, and P. P. Parikh, “Elec-
tricity price forecasting for operational scheduling of behind-the-meter
storage systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 9, no. 6, pp.
6612–6622, 2017.
[14] H. Wang and B. Zhang, “Energy storage arbitrage in real-time markets
via reinforcement learning,” in 2018 IEEE Power & Energy Society
General Meeting (PESGM) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[15] N. Zheng, J. Jaworski, and B. Xu, “Arbitraging variable efficiency
energy storage using analytical stochastic dynamic programming,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 4785–4795, 2022.
[16] C. Zhang, Y . Fu, and L. Gong, “Short-term electricity price forecast
using frequency analysis and price spikes oversampling,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems , 2022.
[17] X. Lu, J. Qiu, G. Lei, and J. Zhu, “An interval prediction method for day-
ahead electricity price in wholesale market considering weather factors,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 2023.
[18] S. Liu, C. Wu, and H. Zhu, “Topology-aware graph neural networks for
learning feasible and adaptive ac-opf solutions,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, 2022.
[19] R. Fernández-Blanco, J. M. Morales, and S. Pineda, “Forecasting the
price-response of a pool of buildings via homothetic inverse optimiza-
tion,” Applied Energy, vol. 290, p. 116791, 2021.
[20] A. Kovács, “Inverse optimization approach to the identification of
electricity consumer models,” Central European Journal of Operations
Research, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 521–537, 2021.
[21] T. X. Nghiem and C. N. Jones, “Data-driven demand response modeling
and control of buildings with gaussian processes,” in 2017 American
Control Conference (ACC). IEEE, 2017, pp. 2919–2924.
[22] J. Vuelvas and F. Ruiz, “A novel incentive-based demand response model
for cournot competition in electricity markets,” Energy Systems, vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 95–112, 2019.
[23] Y . Bian, N. Zheng, Y . Zheng, B. Xu, and Y . Shi, “Demand response
model identification and behavior forecast with optnet: A gradient-
based approach,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth ACM International
Conference on Future Energy Systems , 2022, pp. 418–429.
[24] B. Yuexin, N. Zheng, Y . Zheng, B. Xu, and Y . Shi, “Predicting strategic
energy storage behaviors,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 2023.
[25] A. N. Elmachtoub and P. Grigas, “Smart “predict, then optimize”,”
Management Science, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 9–26, 2022.
[26] A. N. Elmachtoub, J. C. N. Liang, and R. McNellis, “Decision trees
for decision-making under the predict-then-optimize framework,” in
International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2858–
2867.
[27] L. Baty, K. Jungel, P. S. Klein, A. Parmentier, and M. Schiffer,
“Combinatorial optimization-enriched machine learning to solve the
dynamic vehicle routing problem with time windows,” Transportation
Science, 2024.
[28] Q. Berthet, M. Blondel, O. Teboul, M. Cuturi, J.-P. Vert, and F. Bach,
“Learning with differentiable pertubed optimizers,” Advances in neural
information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 9508–9519, 2020.
[29] B. Xu, M. Korpås, and A. Botterud, “Operational valuation of energy
storage under multi-stage price uncertainties,” in 2020 59th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 55–60.
[30] E. Stai, L. Reyes-Chamorro, F. Sossan, J.-Y . Le Boudec, and M. Paolone,
“Dispatching stochastic heterogeneous resources accounting for grid and
battery losses,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 9, no. 6, pp.
6522–6539, 2017.
[31] M. Yi, S. Alghumayjan, and B. Xu, “Perturbed decision-focused learning
for modeling strategic energy storage,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17085,
2024.
[32] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin,
A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Automatic differentiation in
pytorch,” 2017.
[33] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al. , “Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” Advances in
neural information processing systems , vol. 32, 2019.
[34] B. Tang and E. B. Khalil, “Pyepo: A pytorch-based end-to-end
predict-then-optimize library for linear and integer programming,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.14234, 2022.
[35] Gurobi Optimization, LLC, “Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual,”
2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.gurobi.com
[36] F. Chollet et al., “Keras,” https://github.com/fchollet/keras, 2015.
[37] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S.
Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin et al. , “Tensorflow: Large-scale
machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.04467, 2016.
[38] W. Tang, R. Rajagopal, K. Poolla, and P. Varaiya, “Model and data
analysis of two-settlement electricity market with virtual bidding,” in
2016 IEEE 55th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) . IEEE,
2016, pp. 6645–6650.
[39] A. Wilson, D. Esterhuysen, and D. Hains, “2020 performance review
uq’s 1.1 mw battery project,” 2020.

14
VII. A PPENDIX
Algorithm 2 Self-Scheduling Energy Storage Arbitrage
Require: The training data D = {x1, x2, ..., xn}; The testing
data ˆD = {(ˆx1, ˆx2, ..., ˆxn}; The time horizon T ; The
power rating P of energy storage; The SoC efficiency η
and capacity E; The initial SoC e0; The maximum epochs
Mmax; The cost coefficients in u(pt, bt).
1: Initialization: The weights w of predictor gw(x) are
randomly initialized.
Prepare optimal arbitrage decisions:
2: Given historical electricity price in D, compute the op-
timal energy storage arbitrage decisions {¯y1, ¯y2, ..., ¯yn},
and form the pairs D = {(x1, ¯y1), (x2, ¯y2), ...,(xn, ¯yn)};
Training stage:
3: for Epochs < Mmax do
4: for Each batch in D do
5: Predict the reward using the predictor ˆλ = gw(x);
6: Forward pass to compute the optimal decisions
p∗
t , b∗
t , t = 1, 2, ..., T by equation (1);
7: Compute the loss Lϵ(ˆλ, ¯y) by equation (15);
8: Compute the total gradient by equation (17) and
backward pass to update the weights w of predictor.;
9: end for
10: end for
Arbitrage stage:
11: Predict the reward using the predictor ˆλ = gw(ˆx);
12: Forward pass to compute the optimal schedules ˆpt,ˆbt, t =
1, 2, ..., T by equation (1);
13: return The energy storage schedules (ˆpt,ˆbt) for t =
1, 2, ...T.
Proposition 1. The differentiablity of perturbed function. As
noise Z is from Gaussian distribution, it has the density
ρ(Z) ∝ exp(−ψ(Z)). For RX = max
y∈X
||y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)||, we have
• Fϵ(ˆλ) is differentiable, and ∇ˆλFϵ(ˆλ) = y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) =
E[y∗(ˆλ + ϵZ)] = E[F (ˆλ + ϵZ)∇Zψ(Z)/ϵ].
• Fϵ(ˆλ) is Lipschitz continuous, and ||Fϵ(ˆλ) − Fϵ(˜λ)|| ≤
RX ||ˆλ − ˜λ||.
Proof. Based on the definition of Fϵ(ˆλ), we have
Fϵ(ˆλ) = E[F (ˆλ + ϵZ)]
=
Z
F (ˆλ + ϵZ)ρ(Z)dZ
=
Z
F (G)ρ( G − ˆλ
ϵ )dG
(22)
where G = ˆλ + ϵZ. We use the change of variable trick to
obtain the last equation in (22). As noise Z is from Gaussian
distribution, ψ(Z) is differentiable. Then we have ∇ρ(Z) =
−ρ(Z)∇ψ(Z). We apply the change of variable trick again
and
∇ˆλFϵ(ˆλ)
= −1
ϵ
Z
F (G)∇ˆλρ( G − ˆλ
ϵ )dG
= 1
ϵ
Z
F (G)ρ( G − ˆλ
ϵ )∇ˆλψ( G − ˆλ
ϵ )dG
= 1
ϵ
Z
F (ˆλ + ϵZ)ρ(Z)∇Zψ(Z)dZ
= E[F (ˆλ + ϵZ)∇Zψ(Z)/ϵ]
(23)
Next we show that Fϵ(ˆλ) is Lipschitz continuous.
From the mean value theorem, we have
||Fϵ(ˆλ) − Fϵ(˜λ)||
≤ sup
ˆλ∈RT
||∇Fϵ(ˆλ)|| ||ˆλ − ˜λ||
= sup
ˆλ∈RT
||y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)|| ||ˆλ − ˜λ||
= RX ||ˆλ − ˜λ||
(24)
Therefore, we can conclude that Fϵ(ˆλ) is Lipschitz contin-
uous.
Then we conclude the proof.
Proposition 2. Impact of scaling factor ϵ.
• y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) is in the interior of X .
• For ˆλ such that y∗(ˆλ) is a unique maximizer: when ϵ →
∞, y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) → y∗
1(
ˆλ
ϵ ) = ϵE[argmax
y∈X
{Z T y}]; when ϵ → 0,
y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) → y∗(ˆλ).
Proof. y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) = E[y∗(ˆλ + ϵZ)] =
R
ρ(Z)y∗(ˆλ + ϵZ)]dZ =P
y∈Y
yP (y∗(ˆλ + ϵZ) = y)
where P (y∗(ˆλ + ϵZ) = y) denotes the probability of y∗(ˆλ +
ϵZ) = y. Y denotes the set of feasible solutions.
Because ρ(Z) is a positive density function, P (y∗(ˆλ +
ϵZ) = y) is positive for all y ∈ Y and P
y∈Y
P (y∗(ˆλ + ϵZ) =
y) = 1.
Therefore, y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) is in the interior of convex hull X of set
Y.
Fϵ(ˆλ) = E[F (ˆλ + ϵZ)]
= ϵE[max
y∈X
{(
ˆλ
ϵ + Z)T y − 1
ϵ u(y)}]
= ϵF1(
ˆλ
ϵ )
(25)
where F1(
ˆλ
ϵ ) denotes the perturbation without scaling by ϵ.
We set the subscript Fϵ as F1.
Because we have y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) = ∇ˆλFϵ(ˆλ) and Fϵ(ˆλ) = ϵF1(
ˆλ
ϵ ),
we can obtain y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) = y∗
1(
ˆλ
ϵ ). When ϵ → ∞,
Fϵ(ˆλ) = ϵE[max
y∈X
{(
ˆλ
ϵ + Z)T y − 1
ϵ u(y)}]
= ϵE[max
y∈X
{Z T y}]
(26)

15
Thus, ϵ → ∞, y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) → y∗
1(
ˆλ
ϵ ) = ϵE[argmax
y∈X
{Z T y}]
Next we show that when ϵ → 0, y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) → y∗(ˆλ).
We define ϵΩ(y) be the Fenchal dual of F (ˆλ)
F (ˆλ) = sup
y∈X
{ˆλT y − ϵΩ(y)} (27)
Thus,
y∗(ˆλ) = argmax
y∈X
{ˆλT y − ϵΩ(y)} (28)
We define Γ(y) be the Fenchal dual of F1(
ˆλ
ϵ )
F1(
ˆλ
ϵ ) = sup
y∈X
{(
ˆλ
ϵ )T y − Γ(y)} (29)
Then ϵΓ(y) is the Fenchal dual of Fϵ(ˆλ)
Fϵ(ˆλ) = ϵF1(
ˆλ
ϵ ) = sup
y∈X
{ˆλT y − ϵΓ(y)} (30)
Therefore,
y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) = argmax
y∈X
{ˆλT y − ϵΓ(y)} (31)
From inequality (40), we have Fϵ(ˆλ) ≥ F (ˆλ), then
ˆλT y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ϵΓ(y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)) ≥ ˆλT y∗(ˆλ) − ϵΩ(y∗(ˆλ)) (32)
By rearranging inequality (32), we obtain
ˆλT y∗(ˆλ) − ˆλT y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) ≤ ϵ(Ω(y∗(ˆλ)) − Γ(y∗
ϵ (ˆλ))) (33)
As y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) is in the interior of X , we have
ˆλT y∗(ˆλ) − ˆλT y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) ≥ 0 (34)
By combining inequalities (33) and (34), we obtain
0 ≤ ˆλT y∗(ˆλ) − ˆλT y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) ≤ ϵ(Ω(y∗(ˆλ)) − Γ(y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)))
(35)
Because Ω(y) and Γ(y) are continuous functions, they
are bounded on X . Therefore, ϵ(Ω(y∗(ˆλ)) − Γ(y∗
ϵ (ˆλ))) is
bounded. Consequently, as ϵ → 0, we have ˆλT y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) →
ˆλT y∗(ˆλ). Since X is closed and bounded, for any sequence
ϵn → 0, the corresponding sequence y∗
ϵn(ˆλ) is within X .
Thus, there exists a sub-sequence yϵnk
(ˆλ) that converges to
some limit lim
k→∞
yϵnk
(ˆλ) → yL and the limit yL ∈ X . Since
ˆλT y∗
ϵnk
(ˆλ) → ˆλT y∗(ˆλ), it follows that ˆλT yL = ˆλT y∗(ˆλ).
Given that y∗(ˆλ) is the unique solution, we have y∗(ˆλ) = yL.
Thus, all subsequences yϵnk
(ˆλ) converge to the same limit
y∗(ˆλ). Therefore, when ϵ → 0, y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) → y∗(ˆλ). This
concludes the proof.
Proposition 3. The property of perturbed loss function
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y).
• LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is a convex function of ˆλ.
• 0 ≤ L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y) ≤ T P ϵ.
Proof. LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y) is a convex function of ˆλ because it is a
maximum of linear function of ˆλ. Based on the definition of
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y), and for any µ ∈ [0, 1], ˆλ1, ˆλ2 ∈ RT , we have
µLP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ1, ¯y) + (1 − µ)LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ2, ¯y)
= µE[LF Y (ˆλ1 + ϵZ, ¯y)] + (1 − µ)E[LF Y (ˆλ2 + ϵZ, ¯y)]
= E[µLF Y (ˆλ1 + ϵZ, ¯y) + (1 − µ)LF Y (ˆλ2 + ϵZ, ¯y)]
≥ E[LF Y (µˆλ1 + (1 − µ)ˆλ2 + ϵZ, ¯y)]
= LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλµ, ¯y)
(36)
where ˆλµ = µˆλ1 + (1 − µ)ˆλ2. The expectation preserves
the convexity. Therefore, we conclude that LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) =
E[LF Y (ˆλ + ϵZ, ¯y)] is a convex function of ˆλ.
For all Z, we have
max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)} ≥ (ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y) (37)
We take the expectation over Z’s distribution on both side of
(37), and we can get
E[max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)}] ≥ E[(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)]
(38)
For the right hand side of (38),
E[(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)] = (ˆλ + ϵE[Z])T y − u(y)
= ˆλT y − u(y)
(39)
The last equation in (39) holds because Z is from a
Gaussian distribution N (0, 1) with E[Z] = 0.
Then inequality (38) can be written as
E[max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)}] ≥ ˆλT y − u(y) (40)
We subtract ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y) on both sides,
E[max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)}] − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y))
≥ ˆλT y − u(y) − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y))
(41)
It is clear that the left hand side is LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) and
the right hand side is LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y). Thus, we conclude that
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) ≥ L F Y (ˆλ, ¯y).
For all Z ∈ RT , we have
max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)}
≤ max
y∈X
{ˆλT y − u(y)} + max
y∈X
{ϵZ T y}
= max
y∈X
{ˆλT y − u(y)} + ϵmax
y∈X
{Z T y}
(42)
Take the expectation on both sides,
E[max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)}]
≤ max
y∈X
{ˆλT y − u(y)} + ϵE[max
y∈X
{Z T y}]
(43)
We subtract ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y) on both sides,

16
E[max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)}] − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y)) ≤
max
y∈X
{ˆλT y − u(y)} − (ˆλT ¯u − u(¯y)) + ϵE[max
y∈X
{Z T y}]
(44)
Because E[max
y∈X
{Z T y}] ≤ T P, we conclude that
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) ≤ L F Y (ˆλ, ¯y) + T P ϵ. Thus, when ϵ →
0, combining two inequalities lead to LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) →
LF Y (ˆλ, ¯y)
Proposition 4. Gradient of perturbed loss function.
• The gradient of the perturbed loss function is
∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) = y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y. (45)
• ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is Lipschitz continuous.
Proof.
LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y) =
max
y∈X
{(˜λ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)} − (˜λT ¯y − u(¯y))
≥ max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)} + y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)
T
(˜λ − ˆλ)
− (˜λT ¯y − u(¯y))
= max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)} − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y))
+ y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)T (˜λ − ˆλ) + (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y)) − (˜λT ¯y − u(¯y))
= max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)} − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y))
+ y∗
ϵ (ˆλ)T (˜λ − ˆλ) + (ˆλT ¯y) − (˜λT ¯y)
= max
y∈X
{(ˆλ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)} − (ˆλT ¯y − u(¯y))
+ (y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y)T (˜λ − ˆλ)
(46)
where the inequality follows y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) ∈ argmax{(ˆλ+ ϵZ)T y −
u(y)} = ∂L1
ϵ(ˆλ,¯y)
∂ˆλ . To simplify the notation, we denote
max
y∈X
{(˜λ + ϵZ)T y − u(y)} as L1
ϵ(˜λ, p, b), and we have
L1
ϵ(˜λ, ¯y) ≥ L1
ϵ(ˆλ, ¯y) + ∂L1
ϵ(ˆλ,¯y)
∂ˆλ
T
(˜λ − ˆλ).
Then we conclude that y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y is a subgradient of
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y), i.e., y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y ∈ ∂LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ,¯y)
∂ˆλ . Because
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is smooth, y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y is the gradient of
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y).
Next, we show ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is Lipschitz continuous.
∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − ∇LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y)
= (y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − ¯y) − (y∗
ϵ (˜λ) − ¯y)
= y∗
ϵ (ˆλ) − y∗
ϵ (˜λ)
= E[F (ˆλ + ϵZ)ψ(Z)/ϵ] − E[F (˜λ + ϵZ)ψ(Z)/ϵ]
= E[(F (ˆλ + ϵZ) − F (˜λ + ϵZ))ψ(Z)/ϵ]
(47)
Based on Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, we can obtain
||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − ∇LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y)||
= ||E[(F (ˆλ + ϵZ) − F (˜λ + ϵZ))ψ(Z)/ϵ]||
≤ ||E[(F (ˆλ + ϵZ) − F (˜λ + ϵZ))||2]
1
2 E[||ψ(Z)||2/ϵ2]
1
2
≤ R X ||ˆλ − ˜λ||E[||ψ(Z)||2/ϵ2]
1
2
= RX M
ϵ ||ˆλ − ˜λ||
(48)
Therefore, ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is RX M
ϵ -Lipschitz continuous.
Convergence Analysis of the Optimization Layer
In the main text, we illustrate the difficulty of analyzing
the convergence of the whole pipline. Thus, we focus on the
perturbed optimization layer and consider LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) as a
function of ˆλ. Given that LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is a convex function of
ˆλ in Proposition 3, and ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is Lipschitz continuous
in Proposition 4, the proof of convergence for the optimization
layer is straightforward.
Proof. As ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is RX M
ϵ -Lipschitz continuous, it
implies that ∇2LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) ⪯ RX M
ϵ I. Take the quadratic
expansion over LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) and obtain
LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y) ≤ LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) +∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)
T
(˜λ − ˆλ)+
1
2∇2LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||˜λ − ˆλ||2
2
≤ LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) +∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)
T
(˜λ − ˆλ) + RX M
2ϵ ||˜λ − ˆλ||2
2
(49)
Let ˜λ = ˆλ − α∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y), where α denotes the step size.
Plug ˜λ into (49),
LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y)
≤ L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) + ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)
T
(ˆλ − α∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − ˆλ)
+ RX M
2ϵ ||ˆλ − α∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − ˆλ||2
2
= LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)
T
(α∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y))+
RX M α2
2ϵ ||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2
= LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − α||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2+
RX M α2
2ϵ ||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2
= LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − α(1 − RX M α
2ϵ )||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2
(50)
When α ≤ ϵ
RX M , −(1 − RX M α
2ϵ ) = ( RX M α
2ϵ − 1) ≤ − 1
2
LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y) ≤ L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − α
2 ||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2 (51)
Inequality (51) implies that at each iteration, the value of
the objective function decreases until it reaches the optimal
value LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y) = 0.
Since LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is convex,

17
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y) ≥ L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) + ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)T (λ∗ − λ)
(52)
Move LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) to the left-hand side,
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) ≤ L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y) + ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)T (λ − λ∗)
(53)
Plug (53) into (51), we obtain
LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y) ≤ L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y) + ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)T (λ − λ∗)
− α
2 ||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2
(54)
Thus,
LP F Y
ϵ (˜λ, ¯y) − LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y)
≤ ∇L P F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)T (λ − λ∗) − α
2 ||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2
= 1
2α(2α∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)T (λ − λ∗) − α2||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2)
= 1
2α(2α∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)T (λ − λ∗) − α2||∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y)||2
2
− ||ˆλ − ˆλ∗||2
2 + ||ˆλ − ˆλ∗||2
2)
= 1
2α(||ˆλ − ˆλ∗||2
2 − ||ˆλ − ∇LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) − ˆλ∗||2
2)
= 1
2α(||ˆλ − ˆλ∗||2
2 − ||˜λ − ˆλ∗||2
2)
(55)
The inequality in (55) holds for every iteration of gradient
descent. By replacing ˜λ∗ with ˆλ(i) for k iterations and
summing them together, we obtain
kX
i=1
(LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ(i), ¯y) − LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y))
=
kX
i=1
1
2α(||ˆλ(i−1) − ˆλ∗||2
2 − ||ˆλ(i) − ˆλ∗||2
2)
= 1
2α(||ˆλ(0) − ˆλ∗||2
2 − ||ˆλ(k) − ˆλ∗||2
2)
≤ 1
2α(||ˆλ(0) − ˆλ∗||2
2)
(56)
where the transition from the first equality to the second
equality is based on the telescopic sum. Because the value
of LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ, ¯y) is decreasing in each iteration until it reaches
the optimal value, we have
LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ(k), ¯y) − LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y)
≤ 1
k
kX
i=1
(LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ(i), ¯y) − LP F Y
ϵ (ˆλ∗, ¯y))
≤ ||ˆλ(0) − ˆλ∗||2
2
2αk
(57)
Therefore, we conclude the proof.