A Review of Lithium-Ion Battery Models in
Techno-economic Analyses of Power Systems
Anton V. Vykhodtsev a, Darren Jang b, Qianpu Wangb, Hamidreza Zareipour a,
William D. Rosehart a
aDepartment of Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary, Canada
bEnergy, Mining and Environment Research Centre, National Research Council of Canada,
Canada
Abstract
The penetration of the lithium-ion battery energy storage system (BESS) into
the power system environment occurs at a colossal rate worldwide. This is
mainly because it is considered as one of the major tools to decarbonize, digi-
talize, and democratize the electricity grid. The economic viability and technical
reliability of projects with batteries require appropriate assessment because of
high capital expenditures, deterioration in charging/discharging performance
and uncertainty with regulatory policies. Most of the power system economic
studies employ a simple power-energy representation coupled with an empiri-
cal description of degradation to model the lithium-ion battery. This approach
to modelling may result in violations of the safe operation and misleading esti-
mates of the economic beneﬁts. Recently, the number of publications on techno-
economic analysis of BESS with more details on the lithium-ion battery perfor-
mance has increased. The aim of this review paper is to explore these publica-
tions focused on the grid-scale BESS applications and to discuss the impacts of
using more sophisticated modelling approaches. First, an overview of the three
most popular battery models is given, followed by a review of the applications
Email addresses: anton.vykhodtsev@ucalgary.ca (Anton V. Vykhodtsev),
Darren.Jang@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca (Darren Jang), Qianpu.Wang@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca (Qianpu Wang),
hzareipo@ucalgary.ca (Hamidreza Zareipour), rosehart@ucalgary.ca (William D.
Rosehart)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier June 17, 2021
arXiv:2106.08702v1  [eess.SY]  16 Jun 2021

of such models. The possible directions of future research of employing detailed
battery models in power systems’ techno-economic studies are then explored.
Keywords: Li-ion battery, modelling, battery operation, battery planning,
power system economics
1. Introduction
The number of lithium-ion BESS projects in operation, under construction,
and in the planning stage grows steadily around the world due to the im-
provements of technology [1], economy of scale [2], bankability [3], and new
regulatory initiatives [4]. It is projected that by 2040 there will be about
1,095GW/2,850GWh of stationary energy storage in operation mostly in the
forms of batteries [5]. Although the private investor in energy storage for grid
applications encounters high capital cost compared with conventional solutions,
deteriorating battery characteristics, and revenue risk associated with changing
regulatory policies, the economic value of such projects is mostly assessed using a
simplistic black-box representation of the battery operation [6] and an empirical
relationship to characterize ageing [7]. A black-box modelling of a lithium-ion
battery is reasonable if the large-scale optimization is solved where additional
state variables characterizing a battery would further increase computational
complexity. However, short-term operation and long-term planning for the in-
dividual storage owner will beneﬁt from detailed models of BESS [8, 9]. For
example, when a lithium-ion battery storage is used to provide multiple services
for the electrical grid for better asset utilization and economic beneﬁts for the
owner [10], the optimal market participation calculated using a simplistic model
may lead to the execution of infeasible operations and an erroneous estimate
of economic beneﬁts [11]. This occurs because a simple battery model can not
reﬂect the physical processes inside a lithium-ion cell, which is the main com-
ponent of BESS. This can be more pronounced if the operation and planning
2

of BESS for the power system will be performed over multiscale time horizons:
control strategy for participating in the electricity and ancillary services markets
encompasses hours/minutes/seconds, degradation occurs every second and ac-
cumulates over years, and both the planning horizon and the replacement plan
should be calculated for years [12]. The linkage of these timescales will likely
be inaccurate if a simple black-box model is used since it operates with power
in MW over an hour time interval. The scarce experimental data supports the
importance to consider more detailed models for operation [8, 11] as well as for
the long-term performance [13].
In a pioneering work published in 1985, the techno-economic assessment of
BESS application was performed by Sobieski [14] where the author compared
BESS with combustion turbines for peak shaving capacity expansion and for
spinning reserve. Over the years since, the strategic battery operation in various
decision-making studies in power systems have been modelled using generic
models without a reference to a particular battery technology. Miletic and co-
workers [15] summarized and structured optimization frameworks and market
models for stationary energy storage used in operation and planning problems
on the transmission and distribution levels. A standard power-energy model
and its various modiﬁcations were discussed as well. However, the impact of
including additional details into the simple battery model was not assessed.
The lithium-ion battery community suggests a variety of models with dif-
ferent levels of accuracy and computational complexity for simulation [16] and
characterization of ageing [17]. These models are usually employed in the bat-
tery management system (BMS) to predict battery behaviour and to estimate
state-of-charge or state-of-health of the battery [18]. Until recently the strate-
gic operation of stationary BESS was derived using advanced battery models
by only a few researchers[13, 19]. The critical review of three models of BESS,
3

namely the energy reservoir model, the charge reservoir model, and the concen-
tration based model, were provided to the power system research community by
Rosewater et al. [20] where they used them to calculate the optimal schedule
of a BESS for a peak shaving application. The authors outlined the advantages
and disadvantages of each model from a computational point of view but they
mostly reviewed references outside of typical system-level grid applications of
BESS.
The contribution of the present review paper is to provide a detailed overview
of alternative battery models and how they have been used to represent grid-
scale BESS in electrical power system studies. In particular, we focus on papers
that have integrated transmission-connected BESS into grid operation and plan-
ning techno-economic studies. This paper builds on previous works; for example,
it extends the work presented in [20] where the models were presented but no
discussions of their application in techno-economic optimization problems were
conducted. Compared with[15], where diﬀerent optimization models for BESS
operation and planning were summarized, and with [18], where optimization
protocols and frameworks for BESS applications were addressed, in this review
paper, various applications were examined from the perspective of how the bat-
tery was described and represented. The review work [21] was focused on the
battery models for the BMS and the architecture of BESS and BMS. Their
case study only addressed optimal charging scheduling for the combined BESS-
photovoltaic generation plant considering physics-based model whereas in this
paper a broader range of BESS applications is examined.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: the next section gives
an overview of BESS models, the third section presents examples of economic
studies with BESS providing diﬀerent services, the fourth section discusses and
summarizes the impact of BESS models on the strategic operation and planning.
4

The last section presents the conclusion.
2. An overview of the lithium-ion battery modelling approaches
A battery is an electrochemical device that is able to store electrical energy
in the form of chemical energy and to convert it back to electrical energy when
it is needed. Since their invention in 1800 by Alessandro Volta, various bat-
tery technologies have emerged; however, in this work, we are focused on the
lithium-ion technology. This type of battery was pioneered by Whittingham
[22], signiﬁcantly improved by Goodenough [23], and brought to the market
by Sony in early the 1990s. Today, the term battery is often used to refer to
the electrochemical storage as a whole system. In fact, each battery consists
of a pack of elementary electrochemical units – cells. The way the cells are
connected in the battery (in parallel and in series) determines the battery’s
nameplate ratings. A cell is a physical place where the conversion occurs and
where the electrochemical energy is stored.
The battery models by the extent of description of the physical processes and
corresponding safety constraints can be divided into black-box, phenomenologi-
cal, and physical models [24, 25]. In the black-box model (Figure 1a), a battery
is replaced with a reservoir or a bucket, where energy comes in and comes out.
This model does not consider a description of the physical phenomena inside
the cell. If the phenomenological model is used (Figure 1b), the battery is re-
placed with the system that was empirically built to replicate the response of the
battery to the control commands [16]. The electrochemical process inside the
battery and the response of the cell to external factors are accurately described
using the physical model (Figure 1c) [24].
The long-term performance of the battery deteriorates with time (calen-
dar ageing) and with the number of charging/discharging cycles (cycle age-
5

(a) Power-Energy
Model
(b) Voltage-Current Model
 (c) Concentration-Current
Model
Figure 1: The lithium-ion battery models used in techno-economic analysis of power system.
ing). There are several mechanical and electrochemical processes that gradually
deteriorate either energy capacity, rated charging/discharging power, or both.
The ageing of the lithium-ion cells is impacted by environmental conditions,
such as high and low temperatures, operating conditions, such as high charg-
ing/discharging current and high/low state-of-charge, and even when the battery
is at rest [26]. The degradation of the lithium-ion cell is usually accompanied by
loss of lithium inventory or loss of active material of an electrode. The lithium
inventory is consumed by various side reactions. The decline of the number of
cyclable lithium leads to a decrease in energy capacity and by-products of these
parasitic reactions create additional internal resistance of the cell that reduces
the available charging/discharging power capacity. Examples of such processes
are solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) ﬁlm growth and lithium plating. The SEI
formation is considered as a dominant degradation mechanism [17]. The SEI
is mostly formed on the surface of the negative electrode during charging since
6

these conditions favour electrochemical decomposition of electrolyte [27]. The
lithium ions can also be converted to metallic lithium which is deposited on the
electrode through the lithium plating process. The structural changes, such as
cracks in the electrode particles or dissolution of material in electrolyte, lead to
loss of electrode active material. More detailed information on the degradation
mechanisms in the lithium-ion cell can be found in [26], [28], and [17].
In this section, the battery models that can be found in power system oper-
ation and planning papers are reviewed.
2.1. Power-Energy Model
The simplest model of the battery assumes that the battery can be seen as
an energy reservoir in which the energy is pumped to store and from which the
energy is drawn to consume (Figure 1a). If such a model is used for analysis
there is no need to distinguish elementary electrochemical units or the type of
electrochemistry within the battery. This is the most popular model to charac-
terize the operation of the battery in techno-economic studies in power systems.
It is likely that this modelling approach has come from the mature pumped hy-
dro energy storage modelling that was around for a long time [29]. The control
variables for this model are charging, cht, and discharging, dist powers whereas
state-of-energy,SoE t, is the only state variable. The state-of-energy indicates
the present value of energy (often in MWh in power systems literature) stored in
the battery. The BESS is not an ideal system, thus there will be losses during
the charging/discharging cycling. The loss in a Power-Energy Model is com-
monly considered through the introduction of the energy eﬃciency factor which
can be assigned either separately for both charging, ηch, and discharging, ηdis,
operations [30] or as a round-trip energy eﬃciency for the whole cycle [31, 32].
The generic Power-Energy Model assumes ﬁxed energy eﬃciencies and constant
rated charging/discharging power that do not depend on SoEt. The evolution
7

of state-of-energy is a core of the Power-Energy Model and the relationship be-
tween two consecutive observations ofSoEt with a time step τ between them is
expressed as
SoEt =SoEt−1 +τ(ηchcht − dist
ηdis ). (1)
The technical aspects of the BESS are considered by enforcing limits on the
charging and discharging maximum power and allowing only to store energy
until the rated energy capacity is reached. Expression for state-of-energy (1) al-
lows the schedule with simultaneous charging and discharging (e.g., that may be
realized for electricity market cases with negative nodal energy prices or for ideal
batteries with eﬃciencies equal to unity [33]). In this case, to avoid simulta-
neous charging and discharging, binary variables are introduced [34]. However,
when the cost of BESS operation is included in the objective and eﬃciencies are
less than unity, simultaneous charging and discharging is suboptimal and should
not appear in the optimal solution [31, 35]. The Power-Energy Model can be
updated by adding some features of the lithium-ion cell operation through the
functional dependencies of maximum permissible charging/discharging power on
state-of-energy as in [36, 8], or energy eﬃciency on state-of-energy and charg-
ing/discharging power as in [37, 38], or both dependencies as in [37, 39, 9].
A simple Power-Energy Model can also be coupled with degradation descrip-
tion of the battery as result of cycling or calendar ageing. In power system
economics studies, degradation is mostly modelled either enforcing operation
limits [40, 41], or using the energy throughput model [42], or employing the
cycle-counting model [7]. The last two approaches can be included in the opti-
mization framework by assigning the cost of degradation in the cost function or
by limiting degradation through the introduction of additional constraints to a
Power-Energy Model. References for each method are summarized in Table 1.
8

In the energy throughput or power-based method, there is a linear depen-
dence between the energy capacity fade and the energy throughput [42, 43, 41,
44]. It is assumed that the amount of energy that can be stored and delivered
by BESS throughout its lifespan is ﬁxed. A battery is often deﬁned as healthy
until it reaches the End-of-life (EoL) state that occurs when the battery has
lost 20% of the original capacity. The framework can be built by incorporating
degradation cost in the objective [42] or by limiting the number of full charg-
ing/discharging cycles per day [40] or per year [41]. The energy throughput
technique for ageing assessment works properly for one charging/discharging
cycle per day [12]. The cycle-counting degradation model relies on the nonlin-
ear ageing occurred from cycling: cycles with smaller depth-of-discharge (DoD)
contribute less into the degradation of the battery [7]. The cycles are extracted
from a state-of-energy proﬁle using the rainﬂow cycle-counting algorithm [45].
Each cycle with a certain DoD is assigned with a ﬁxed amount of degradation
to the energy capacity according to the cycle depth ageing stress function that
can be obtained from the experimental data. The cycle-counting method is
incorporated into the optimization framework by including the cost of degrada-
tion into the objective function. This cost is calculated by benchmarking the
amount of degradation with the battery replacement cost [46]. Although the
cycle-based degradation model is more advanced than the energy throughput
method, both techniques do not consider the eﬀect of the average state-of-energy
around which the charging/discharging cycle occurs [47]. Another limitation of
the cycle-counting degradation model with rainﬂow algorithm is that it only
has a recursive form. Several approximations suitable for the optimization en-
vironment were suggested [48, 46, 49]. Some authors also employed empirical
nonlinear degradation models [47, 50] where the cumulative degradation cost
function was constructed for diﬀerent state-of-energy and the current rates for
9

Table 1: Literature survey on empirical degradation models.
Decision horizon Operational
limits
Energy
through-
put
method
Cycle-
counting
method
Other
< 1 week [42], [35],[40] [42] [7], [49], [48] [47], [50]
< 1 year [9] [41], [44],
[43], [9]
[46], [53]
< 20 year [12]
charge/discharge.
The energy eﬃciency and maximum power capacity of the BESS also de-
grades with cycling or when the battery ages over time [51]. The eﬀect of ageing
on the energy eﬃciency and maximum charging/discharging power was explored
in [52] and [9]. A linear relationship between the fading capacity and maximum
charging/discharging power was assumed in [9] and the growth of the cell inter-
nal resistance was explored in [52]. The coupling of long-term performance with
a Power-Energy Model brought problems with computational tractability and is
solved either for short optimization horizons (Table 1) or employing sequential
approaches [53, 47].
The incorporation of a generic Power-Energy Model within power system
optimization frameworks usually leads to a linear programming problem [41] or
a linear mixed integer programming problem [37] that can be easily solved with
standard commercial solvers.
2.2. Voltage-Current Model
The charging/discharging schedule calculated using a Power-Energy Model
may lead to the operation of the battery out of permissible range for current and
voltage [8]. If this occurs the “optimized” operation will be corrected by BMS
[18]. This will lead to a deviation from estimated ﬁnancial beneﬁts and grid
service commitment in power systems studies. The formulation of the battery
10

model can be improved if some details of the battery operation are incorporated.
A phenomenological model, such as the equivalent-circuit model, is designed to
replicate the battery’s charging/discharging performance and is usually used
in BMS [54]. The description of BESS operation based on the electric circuit
presents an attractive option to model the cell using the Kirchhoﬀ equations.
The equivalent-circuit model by its nature does not model the dynamics of
the internal processes inside the cell but characterizes the measurable response
of the cell to the external inﬂuence. The charging/discharging performance
curves show how the voltage, which is the state variable, across the cell changes
with the current, which is the control variable, ﬂowing through the cell while
charging/discharging. With regard to the decision variables when an equivalent-
circuit model is employed for the optimal control in the power system, the model
can be referred to as a Voltage-Current Model. The impedance parameters of
the Voltage-Current Model are obtained from ﬁtting an experimental data or the
manufacturer’s speciﬁcation to the governing equation of the suggested circuit
model.
There are various conﬁgurations of an electric circuit for a Voltage-Current
Model [55]; the choice depends on the accuracy requirement, the level of toler-
ance to the computational complexity, and the cell chemistry. The ﬁrst-order
approximation consists of two elements: voltage source and resistance [24]. A
more advanced Voltage-Current Model usually consists of a set of resistors and
capacitors in series or parallel, current sources, and special nonlinear elements.
The simple electric circuit that captures the main processes in the cell is shown
in Figure 1b. This model was derived using [24] and is based on empirical
observations. The variable voltage source changes its output as a function of
state-of-charge. This voltage is sometimes referred to as an open-circuit volt-
age [24] and is supplied by the electrode chemistry. The nonideality of the
11

cell is modelled through resistor R0. This resistor also ensures that the output
voltage drops relatively to the open-circuit voltage when the load is connected,
and increases above the open-circuit voltage during charging operation. The
lithium ions do not immediately stop ﬂowing when the charging/discharging
is interrupted. To model this diﬀusion process, a resistor, Rd, and capacitor,
Cd, in parallel are employed. The nonlinear elements are used to simulate the
so-called hysteresis eﬀect when an open-circuit voltage reaches diﬀerent values
for the same state-of-charge as a consequence of thermodynamic hysteresis or
mechanical hysteresis [56]. The latter is a consequence of mechanical stress on
electrodes from lithiation and delithiation and the former originates from the
variation of the lithium intercalation rates between particles of active electrode
material.
The control variable for the Voltage-Current Model is current through the
cell It. It is chosen to be positive during the discharge for consistency of the
description. The state variables, in this model, are the state-of-charge measured
in Ah, the operating voltage Vt, and the diﬀusion voltage V d
t , i.e., the voltage
across a capacitor. The evolution of the state-of-charge is given as:
SoCt =SoCt−1 −ηcItτ, (2)
where τ corresponds to the time step between two estimates of SoCt, and ηc
stands for the coulombic eﬃciency that reﬂects how much charge is lost during
the charging/discharging cycle.
Using Kirchhoﬀ’s Law for voltage, the following expression can be derived
to relate voltages in the circuit [24]:
OCV t(SoCt) =ItR +V d
t +Vt. (3)
12

Using Kirchhoﬀ’s Law for current, the relationship for currents in a parallel
RC branch is given as [24]:
It = V d
t
Rd
+Cd
dV d
t
dt . (4)
If the derivative dV d
t
dt is approximated using ﬁnite diﬀerences, the diﬀusion
voltageV dt can be calculated as:
V d
t = RdCd
τ +RdCd
V d
t−1 + τR d
τ +RdCd
It. (5)
The Voltage-Current Model is formulated using the single cell perspective
which assumes that all cells within the battery show the same performance
[57]. Although the battery balancing scheme provided by BMS is intended to
maintain variation between the cells of the battery pack at minimum [58], in
general, this statement requires additional investigation [59, 20]. DC Voltage
and current are not typical variables in power system economic studies, but both
of these can be employed naturally to ﬁnd the power supplied or consumed by
a BESS that consists of N lithium-ion cells in series and in parallel, as follows:
Pt =NI tVt. (6)
The Voltage-Current Model allows for the restrictions speciﬁed by the pro-
ducer of the lithium-ion cell in the box constraint on current and voltage, as
follows:
V M in ≤Vt ≤V M ax (7)
−I M axCh ≤It ≤I M axDis, (8)
13

whereV M in andV M ax identify operational limits for voltage, and I M axCh and
I M axDis are maximum absolute values of continuous charging and discharging
currents. The range of SoCt is limited from one side by nominal capacityQM ax
in [Ah], as follows:
0 ≤SoCt ≤QM ax (9)
The model presented above is discussed in more detail in [24] and was used in
the optimization framework by [57]. In contrast, Tayloret al. [11] used a simpler
electric circuit composed of the voltage source and a resistor in their work to
derive a strategic operation of BESS. Other electric circuits that can be used
in optimization frameworks can be taken from [55]. The examples of the other
equivalent-circuit models derived from the physics-based models can be found
in [60, 61, 62]. The degradation can be included in the Voltage-Current Model
using the energy throughput as in [57, 62]. The Voltage-Current model can
also be built without a reference to the underlying electric circuit and operates
using empirical relationships. For instance in [63], the voltage of the lithium-
ion cell, as a function of charging/discharging current and state-of-charge, was
constructed using bi-variate cubic splines.
The incorporation of a Voltage-Current Model, which is governed by equa-
tions (2),(3),(5)-(8), into the optimization framework leads to a nonlinear pro-
gramming problem because of a nonlinear relationship between open-circuit
voltage and state-of-charge. The ﬁnal problem can be solved with various oﬀ-
the-shelf nonlinear solvers such as IPOPT [64] or using linearization techniques
combined with the commercial linear solvers.
2.3. Concentration-Current Model
Despite having a number of advantages over the Power-Energy Model, the
Voltage-Current Model does not provide information about the physical process
14

inside the battery and can produce errors if it is used outside of the operating
conditions for which it was empirically built [24]. In contrast, the physics-based
electrochemical model of a lithium-ion cell can achieve better accuracy [57].
The enhanced model of a lithium-ion cell is able to characterize the transport
of charge carriers, interfacial reactions, thermal eﬀects, and their mutual eﬀects
on each other [24]. The most rigorous model is too complex for the optimization
framework because the model contains coupled partial diﬀerential equations and
nonlinear algebraic expressions [8].
The trade-oﬀ between accuracy and possibility to implement a more ad-
vanced model in the optimization framework can be found in the single parti-
cle model of the lithium-ion cell (Figure 1c). The single particle model limits
its consideration to the physical principles such as the transport of lithium
in the active material of electrodes and the kinetics of the lithium intercala-
tion/deintercalation reactions [65]. The model originates from the porous elec-
trode theory [66], which is used to quantify electrode processes within the porous
electrodes. The single particle model is built on several assumptions [67]. First,
the active material of both electrodes is composed of uniform spherical elec-
trode particles, which all have an equal radius Ri (the superscript i is replaced
by p for positive electrode and it is changed to n for negative electrode). A
single electrode particle is employed to simulate the transport of lithium in the
active material of the electrode. Second, the concentration of the lithium ions
in the electrolyte is assumed to be uniform and constant. Finally, the rate of
electrode reaction at the electrode/electrolyte interface does not change from
one electrode particle to another. The second and third assumptions are valid
in cases of low to medium current through the cell [65] when the impact of the
electrolyte potential is negligible [68].
The movement of lithium under the concentration gradient in the electrode
15

particle with radius Ri is described by a one-dimensional parabolic partial dif-
ferential equation in spherical coordinates, as follows [67]:
∂ci
∂t = Di
ri2
∂
∂r i (ri2∂ci
∂r i ), (10)
whereci stands for the concentration of lithium atoms in the electrode particle,
ri is a radial coordinate, and Di is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of lithium in the
electrode active material. The homogeneous Neumann boundary condition is
applied at the center of the electrode particle to conserve symmetry, as follows
[65]:
(Di∂ci
∂t )ri=0 = 0 (11)
The molar ﬂux of lithium ions, i.e., the reaction rate of the deintercala-
tion/intercalation process, J i on the surface of the electrode sets the Neumann
boundary condition for the diﬀusion equation, as follows [69]:
(Di∂ci
∂t )ri=Ri = −J i. (12)
The initial condition is deﬁned as [67]:
(ci(ri,t ))t=0 =ci
0(ri), (13)
whereci
0(ri) stands for the initial concentration of lithium in the electrode. This
concentration depends on the initial state-of-charge of the lithium-ion cell. The
diﬀusion equation with the boundary conditions presents a challenge for incor-
porating it as a constraint in the optimization framework. The “optimization-
wise” formulation can be derived through the ﬁnite diﬀerences of the original
partial diﬀerential equations [24] or their approximations based on the ordinary
16

diﬀerential equations [70, 71], or using the Chebyshev collocation method [65].
The electrode reaction is characterized by the Butler-Volmer kinetics equa-
tion [69]. This expression describes the rate of the electrode reaction, i.e., the
molar ﬂux of lithium ions, at which lithium ion consumes electron and converts
to neutral atom inside the electrode or vice versa and is expressed as:
J i = 2ji
0 sinh(Fη i
2RT ), (14)
where F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and T is temperature.
The activation overpotential ηi is responsible for driving the current that was
generated at the electrode during the lithium intercalation/deintercalation pro-
cess. The exchange current density ji
0 represents the oxidation and reduction
currents without external impact and is given as:
ji
0 =kiF
√
(cM ax,i −csurf,i)csurf,icel, (15)
where ki denotes the reaction rate constant, csurf,i stands for the lithium con-
centration at the surface of the electrode particle, cM ax,i is the maximum con-
centration of lithium atoms in the electrode particle, and cel is the electrolyte
concentration (constant for single particle model).
Another parameter to characterize the lithium-ion cell is the so-called equi-
librium potential or the open-circuit potential of the electrode that shows how
the Gibbs free energy changes when lithium ions enter/leave the electrode [72].
The functional dependence between the concentration of lithium on the surface
of the electrode, csurf,i, and open-circuit potential, OCP i, is determined exper-
imentally for each type of electrode chemistry when there is no current ﬂowing
through the cell (equilibrium state). When the cell is charging or discharging,
the potential of the electrode deviates from the open-circuit potential, and is
17

known as the solid-phase potential, φi, and is expressed as:
φi =ηi +OCP i(csurf,i) +I iZ i, (16)
whereI i is the total current through electrode and Z i stands for the resistance
of the ﬁlm on the electrode surface. Finally, the single particle model relates
the applied charging/discharging current with the rate of the electrode reac-
tion through equation (17) for the positive electrode and equation (18) for the
negative electrode respectively, as follows:
J p = − IR p
3νpεpF (17)
J n = IR n
3νnεnF, (18)
whereεp andεn denote the volume fraction of active material in the correspond-
ing electrode, nup and nun are the volumes of each electrode.
Finally, the voltage of the lithium-ion cell is given as:
Vt =φp −φn. (19)
From an optimization perspective the single particle model [57, 19] intro-
duces current and concentration as decision variables, thus it will be referred to
in this work as the Concentration-Current Model. Similar to a Voltage-Current
Model, the Concentration-Current Model represents only one lithium-ion cell
and the projection of this model on the whole battery requires an assumption
that all cells behave identically. The supplied and consumed power by a bat-
tery composed of N lithium ion cell is derived through applied current and the
18

voltage across the cell:
P =NI tVt (20)
The Concentration-Current Model allows introducing speciﬁcations of the
cell in the box constraint form, as follows:
V M in ≤Vt ≤V M ax (21)
−I M axCh ≤It ≤I M axDis, (22)
where V min and V max identify operational limits for voltage, and I max
ch and
I max
dis are maximum continuous charging and discharging currents.
The capacity of the cell is constrained in the Concentration-Current Model
through the lithium concentration in both electrodes:
ci,M in ≤ci
t ≤ci,M ax (23)
where cM in,i and cM ax,i are limits for lithium concentration in an electrode.
The state-of-charge is not employed in the Concentration-Current Model as
a state variable, but it can be used for comparison with other battery models.
It can be derived from the instantaneous lithium concentration in one of the
electrodes, for example in the negative electrode [24], it is given as:
SoC = csurf,n
t −cM in,n
cM ax,n −cM in,nQ, (24)
where Q is the rated capacity of the lithium-ion cell.
When the Concentration-Current Model (10)-(23) is a part of the optimiza-
tion framework, the whole decision-making problem is a nonlinear programming
problem. This problem can be solved using a nonlinear commercial solver such
19

as IPOPT [64].
The Concentration-Current Model can be naturally updated to include the
physical description of the degradation [24]. The growth of SEI is selected as
a principal contributor to the degradation process [73]. The SEI mathematical
model employed here was taken from [74, 67]. The rate of the side reaction
responsible for the formation of SEI is governed by the Tafel equation, as follows:
J sei = jsei
0
F exp( F
2RTηsei), (25)
where ηsei is the overpotential of the side reaction and jsei
0 stands for the ex-
change current for the side reaction. The overpotential ηsei is expressed as:
ηsei =φn −OCP sei −I nZ n, (26)
whereOCP sei is the open-circuit potential of the side reaction. The total current
through the negative electrode is composed of the intercalation/deintercalation
current and the side reaction current density and is given as:
J sei +J Li,n =J n (27)
The resistance of the SEI ﬁlm on the surface of the negative electrode in-
creases as SEI forms [67] and is expressed as:
Z n =Z 0,n + δsei(t)
κ , (28)
where δsei refers to the thickness of SEI ﬁlm and κ is the ionic conductivity of
SEI. It can be reasonably assumed that the rate of SEI growth is proportional
20

to the rate of the side reaction [74] and is given as:
dδsei(t)
dt = −J seiM
ρ , (29)
whereM denotes the molar mass of SEI, ρ is the density of SEI. Equation (29)
can be converted to the discretized version when including in the optimization
framework. The increase in Z n will lead to the decline in charging/discharging
power. Finally, the loss in the lithium inventory due to the SEI formation during
charging can be estimated as:
Closs = −
∫ t2
t1
3εpνpJ sei
Rp dt, (30)
where [t1,t 2] is the time interval during which the cell was charging.
Equations (25)-(30) can be included into nonlinear optimization frameworks.
The single particle model can be improved by adding description of the lithium-
ion transport in electrolyte as in [75] to derive the optimal charging protocol
or as in [76] for assessing revenue in the capacity market under given operation
schedule.
2.4. Summary
The reviewed battery models are found to be employed in the decision-
making problems that include stationary lithium-ion battery storage for power
system level applications; those applications are discussed in the next section.
These three models can be converted to one another: the Power-Energy Model
can be seen as the Voltage-Current Model with constant voltage that is equal to
the nominal voltage of the cell [63]; the Voltage-Current Model can be obtained
from the Concentration-Current Model by matching the physical process inside
the cell with the corresponding circuit component [60].
21

Figure 2: Number of publications in techno-economic studies of Power System with the
battery model diﬀerent from a simple power-energy model
The interest to the models that describe the dynamics of the processes in-
side the battery has increased recently (Figure 2). All the papers in power
system economic studies employing either the Voltage-Current Model or the
Concentration-Current Model were published in the last three years [57, 13, 19,
11, 20, 63]. This can be linked with the appearance of the experimental data
to benchmark the results of the “optimal” schedule [13, 11]. Nonetheless, the
Voltage-Current Model and the Concentration-Current Model are computation-
ally expensive because of the number of constraints [20] and a need for more
time steps to improve stability [57].
3. Alternative Battery Models in Power Systems Studies
In this section, publications, where optimal charging/discharging schedules
were identiﬁed for diﬀerent BESS applications, are reviewed with the scope to
deﬁne how BESS was modelled. The objectives of both system operators and
independent storage owners are examined. The list of BESS applications is
limited to system-level grid applications of BESS, namely: energy arbitrage,
frequency regulation, operating reserve, peak shaving, renewable integration
assistance, and transmission upgrade deferral. Papers that are used in this
section are classiﬁed by the operation and degradation models in Table 2 and
22

Table 2: Literature survey on the battery grid applications (operation models).
Application Power-Energy
Model
V oltage-Current
Model
Concentration-
Current Model
Energy arbitrage [6, 77, 78, 42, 41,
47, 43, 44, 37, 8, 39,
52]
[57] [13, 57]
Frequency regulation [79, 80, 49, 7, 48,
12]
[19]
Operating reserve [46, 50, 49]
Peak shaving [53] [11] [20]
Renewable integration as-
sistance
[81, 82, 83, 9]
Transmission upgrade de-
ferral
[84, 85, 86, 87]
Table 3: Literature survey on the battery grid applications (degradation models).
Application Without degra-
dation
Empirical model Physics-based
model
Energy arbitrage [6, 77, 78, 37, 8, 39] [42, 41, 47, 43, 44,
52]
[57, 13]
Frequency regulation [79, 80] [49, 7, 48, 12] [19]
Operating reserve [38] [46, 50, 49]
Peak shaving [11] [53] [20]
Renewable integration as-
sistance
[81, 82] [83, 9]
Transmission upgrade de-
ferral
[84, 85, 86, 87]
Table 3 respectively.
3.1. Energy arbitrage
Energy arbitrage is exploited by an independent BESS operator to generate
revenue by charging the battery under the low-price conditions and by dis-
charging when prices are higher. The economic analysis of the energy arbitrage
application of BESS was accelerated by the restructuring and deregulation in
the electric utility industry, and one of the ﬁrst works on this topic was done
by Graves et al. [88].
Most works that estimate economic beneﬁts of exploiting energy arbitrage
23

by BESS employ a simple Power-Energy Model. In [6], perfect information
about price and demand and a price-taker model were used to assess the eco-
nomic beneﬁts of incorporating energy storage into the New York electricity
market. The eﬀect of large-scale energy storage on electricity price formation
was examined in [77]. The strategic behavior of a BESS operator under price
uncertainty in day-ahead and real-time electricity markets was addressed in
[78]. Several studies [42, 41, 47, 43, 44] combined a Power-Energy Model with
an empirical degradation model to estimate BESS proﬁtability for energy ar-
bitrage. The empirical based degradation formulation for the energy capacity
with the assumption of linear dependence between energy throughput and extent
of capacity fading signiﬁcantly changed the cost-eﬀectiveness of BESS invest-
ment [42]. In [41], the analysis of energy arbitrage is performed with so-called
equivalent full cycles. In their market settings, they demonstrated that an ex-
tended calendar life is more proﬁtable than an extended cycle life. The BESS
operator would choose charging/discharging cycles with greater arbitrage trad-
ing proﬁt if a longer calendar life is possible. Maheshwari and co-workers [47]
applied their own experimental data with lithium-ion cells to derive their non-
linear degradation model. They claimed that DoD combined with cycle life and
energy throughput quantiﬁcation techniques for degradation fails to acknowl-
edge the impact of state-of-energy and applied current, which were employed
in their work through linear interpolation of their experimental data. In [43],
the optimal value of maximum charging/discharging power was selected for the
ﬁxed capacity considering its degradation over the battery lifespan. Mohsenian-
Rad [40] introduced charging and discharging bidding strategies in a stochastic
framework for self-schedule and economic bids. Using short-term marginal cost
per unit of degradation, which was derived from energy throughput and capital
cost of the battery, He et al. [44] obtained a more accurate estimate of the
24

energy arbitrage business case for the California day-ahead electricity market.
Overall, the energy arbitrage operation considering ageing of the battery gives a
better estimate in the cost/beneﬁt analysis, but methods to characterize ageing
are completely empirical and the results were not validated with real experience.
Some attempts have been made in order to improve the accuracy of the
Power-Energy Model description for BESS representation used in energy arbi-
trage. It included the functional dependence between energy eﬃciency, state-of-
energy, and maximum charging/discharging power. Sakti et al. [37] updated a
Power-Energy Model by considering the nonlinear dependence of the maximum
charging/discharging power limits and energy eﬃciency on state-of-energy. Al-
though the model was empirical by the formulation, authors aﬃrmed that a
simple Power-Energy Model of BESS may overestimate the earnings from en-
ergy arbitrage by 10% compared with their most sophisticated model for a more
volatile price signal resolution over the 7-day decision horizon. The authors of
[8] applied the results of their experimental ﬁndings to better deﬁne the lim-
its of available charging power to reﬂect the constant-current/constant-voltage
charging operation of the lithium-ion cell. The available charging power de-
pends on the state-of-energy. If a generic Power-Energy Model is used for BESS
characterization the optimal schedule in the energy arbitrage application may
overestimate the proﬁt by 300% compared with the actual output obtained from
scaled laboratory BESS that executed an “optimal” schedule for their case study.
Authors of [39] studied the optimal operation of BESS deployed in the IEEE-14
system to exploit arbitrage opportunities. Similar to [37], their BESS model
was an upgrade of a simple Power-Energy Model where ﬁxed parameters were
replaced with state-of-energy dependent ones. The use of nonlinear dependence
between energy eﬃciency, charging/discharging power limits and state-of-energy
was justiﬁed by the Voltage-Current Model as suggested by [60]. Using empir-
25

ical charging/discharging curves, authors concluded that for their case study a
simplistic Power-Energy Model overestimated economic opportunities by 15%
and resulted in the operation of the battery beyond the recommended operat-
ing envelope. He et al. [52] combined a simple Power-Energy Model and energy
throughput method for degradation description to derive the economic EoL of
BESS. The term economic EoL was used by He to refer to the stage of the BESS
state-of-health where the proﬁt opportunities are vanished. In his optimization
protocol energy eﬃciency, power, and energy capacity declined over time and
as a result of cycling.
The energy arbitrage application is also a favourable choice to verify the
robustness of more detailed operation models of BESS. Reniers et al. [57] cal-
culated economic beneﬁts from energy arbitrage over one year of operation for
three diﬀerent battery models, i.e., a Power-Energy Model, a Voltage-Current
Model and a Concentration-Current Model and three diﬀerent degradation for-
mulations. The authors compared these degradation descriptions with the ex-
perimental data and concluded that the concentration-current model was the
most precise. They found that the energy arbitrage market participation strat-
egy obtained for the Concentration-Current Model was considerably more prof-
itable and with less degradation. In a more recent publication by the same
authors [13] the optimal charging/discharging dispatch for energy arbitrage
with Power-Energy Model and Concentration-Current Model were used to cycle
lithium-ion cells in the laboratory conditions. The proﬁt and the capacity loss
were more accurately predicted by the Concentration-Current model. More-
over, physics-based approach for battery operation and ageing characterization
reduced degradation by 30% and improved revenue by 20% compared with con-
ventional Power-Energy Model with empirical degradation.
26

3.2. Frequency regulation
Frequency regulation is one of the ancillary service products and it is needed
to keep frequency within an acceptable range when there is a mismatch between
supply and demand. The fast ramping capabilities of BESS make it a favourable
choice for frequency regulation: for example, 75% of large-scale BESS power ca-
pacity in US is used for the balancing of momentary ﬂuctuations in the system
[89]. The frequency regulation application of BESS in power system economics
studies is rarely examined solely and it is usually combined with energy arbi-
trage.
The BESS is mostly modelled through a generic Power-Energy Model [79, 80]
for charging/discharging performance whereas the degradation is characterized
by means of an empirical relationship [49, 7, 48, 12]. In [79], the authors investi-
gated two-level, planning and operation, strategy for BESS owner to maximize
proﬁt from the frequency regulation market. Zhu et al. [80] derived strate-
gic operation for an aggregator coordinated BESS. Xu [7] found the optimal
control policy for BESS deployed in their case study to boost proﬁt from the
performance-based frequency regulation market using a chance-constraint op-
timization. The author used the cycle counting algorithm to characterize the
long-term performance. The optimal bidding strategy in the frequency reg-
ulation market for the electric vehicle aggregator with diﬀerent participation
scenarios was outlined in [36]. Their model was able to simulate the transition
from constant current mode to constant voltage mode of charging operation.
They highlighted that their representation of the lithium-ion battery resulted in
a more accurate estimate of ﬁnancial beneﬁts: there was up to 20% diﬀerence
compared with a generic Power-Energy Model associated with BESS. Shi and
co-workers [48] coupled a Power-Energy Model with three diﬀerent degradation
models, namely, the ﬁxed cost of degradation, the energy throughput method,
27

and cycle-based model based on the rainﬂow algorithm, to explore the ﬁnancial
beneﬁts of frequency regulation for the BESS owner in the their case study.
It was shown that the rainﬂow cycle-based degradation model projects up to
27.6% growth in revenue, and thus a greater return on investment, and almost
85% increase in battery life expectancy. In [12], a Power-Energy Model cou-
pled with the energy throughput ageing quantiﬁcation technique was used to
ﬁnd the optimal energy capacity of BESS, which proﬁts from energy arbitrage
and frequency regulation with compensation for capacity and energy provided
in the California day-ahead and real-time energy and ancillary services mar-
kets. Assuming a constant degradation rate, the loss of capacity was directly
incorporated into the operation framework as a constraint.
In [19], a Concentration-Current Model was employed to ﬁnd the optimal
schedule of BESS for the frequency regulation market. The strategy was com-
pared with one obtained using a Power-Energy Model with degradation cost,
which was proportional to capacity committed to frequency regulation, in the
objective function and with one where degradation was calculated using the
SEI method in postprocessing of the optimal schedule. The authors reported
a 143% increase in lifetime and 35% growth in proﬁt compared to a generic
Power-Energy Model.
3.3. Operating reserve
The operating reserve is intended for the grid frequency management if a
signiﬁcant unpredictable deviation to the supply/demand balance occurs in the
system. The operating reserve revenue stream for the BESS owner is usually
considered as an additional source of revenue and it is bundled with other BESS
applications in power system economic analysis [32].
The strategic operation of BESS that provides operating reserve services is
usually derived with a simple Power-Energy Model bundled with empirical age-
28

ing models [46, 50, 49]. Xu et al. [46] proposed a dispatch strategy for BESS
considering the cost of battery degradation that was formulated using the Rain-
ﬂow cycle counting algorithm. In [50], the optimal strategy for BESS operator
that submits the bids into both the energy and operating reserve market was
derived by combining the impact of DoD and the discharge rate in the degra-
dation cost function. Reference [49] modelled optimal market participation of
BESS in three day-ahead markets: energy, frequency regulation and operating
reserve markets. The proﬁt of BESS was calculated on a daily basis and pro-
rated by the number of the battery’s daily equivalent 100%-DoD cycles. Nguyen
et al. [38] replaced the ﬁxed energy eﬃciency of a generic Power-Energy Model
with one that nonlinearly depends on the charging/discharging power and state-
of-energy. The parameters for their empirical model were calculated from the
charging/discharging curve provided by the cell manufacturer. The proposed
nonlinear model estimated almost 17% less of the total revenue over one year
compared with simple Power-Energy Model if it was installed in their market
environment. Perez et al. [35] examined the impact of applying practical box
constraints on state-of-energy to limit degradation on the ﬁnancial potential of
BESS providing several services including OR. Although there was a drop in
revenue from energy arbitrage, the net revenue has increased from operating
reserve and frequency regulation contributions because of extended lifespan.
3.4. Peak shaving
A BESS can replace the need to construct a new peaking generation capacity
that would meet the peak demand from a highly volatile load. If a BESS
is installed on the load side it could also work as a peak shaver to minimize
the total electricity bill. There are several works where charging/discharging
decisions were found for the peak shaving application.
Schneider et al. [53] investigated a strategic investment into BESS for a
29

bundled peak shaving and energy arbitrage business model. Their optimization
framework included Power-Energy Model, Rainﬂow cycle counting paradigm for
battery degradation and it was solved heuristically through three stages: on the
ﬁrst stage, the daily scheduling maximizes energy arbitrage revenue corrected
by a degradation penalty term, on the second stage the total monthly revenue
from peak shaving and energy arbitrage is calculated, the third stage is used to
deﬁne the optimal schedule over the year. Taylor [11] employed Voltage-Current
Model formulation for BESS and compared it with Power-Energy Model. The
parameters of the Voltage-Current Model were measured from their own lab
experiments with lithium iron phosphate battery cells. First, the accuracy of
the model was demonstrated by comparison with the experiment. Second, the
optimal schedule of BESS based on the Voltage-Current Model formulation out-
performed the results with Power-Energy Model when the optimal schedule of
each model was processed by the battery hardware simulation tool. Although
simulation was carried out at only two ﬁxed levels of the current rate, it was
clear that a generic Power-Energy Model model did not ensure reliable per-
formance. In the review of battery models for the optimal control [20], the
control strategy for BESS installed to reduce the total electricity bill over 24-
hour decision horizon was obtained for three diﬀerent battery models, namely a
Power-Energy Model, a Voltage-Current Model and the Concentration-Current
Model. The cost reduction in the bill was conducted using energy arbitrage and
peak shaving applications of BESS. The degradation of the lithium-ion cell was
not a part of the analysis. Although the net reduction in the electricity bill
was almost the same for all models and stood at about 8%, the authors claimed
that the control strategy for the Power-Energy Model was likely infeasible. The
Voltage-Current Model and Concentration-Current Model gave similar results
for the state variables such as voltage and current.
30

3.5. Renewable integration assistance
BESS can also accelerate the integration of intermittent renewable capacity
to the grid by mitigating its natural ﬂuctuation and can increase the return
on investment in a renewable generation project if it is combined with a BESS
[89]. The objective of the optimization problems with this application can be
either ﬁnding the optimal operation schedule or the planning problem where
the optimized BESS size is explored to maximize return on investment over the
projected lifespan of a battery.
Similar to operation studies with other BESS applications, the renewable
integration assistance application of BESS is mostly modelled with a simple
Power-Energy Model [81, 82]. In [81] the size and optimal dispatch were deter-
mined for BESS paired with a wind farm. The solution enhanced the operational
stability and economic feasibility of the wind power project. Bhattacharjee et
al. [82] used a generic Power-Energy Model to optimally size energy storage and
transmission interconnector, which were coupled with a wind power facility, for
the strategic participation in the energy market. Recently more works [83, 9]
have been presented with BESS models that can ensure reliable performance
and characterize capacity and power fading. Using a heuristic algorithm Shin
[83] investigated the impact of BESS size on degradation while searching for
the optimal BESS capacity supplementing photovoltaic generation for two sce-
narios of battery use: constant usable energy capacity and a ﬁxed DoD. Jafari
[9] studied the economic impact of pairing oﬀshore wind farm with BESS. This
model of BESS included varying energy eﬃciency and power limits. Calendar
and cycling ageing of capacity were also incorporated in the model by a linear
decline assumption for calendar ageing and combination of the energy through-
put with the number of equivalent full cycles for cycling ageing respectively. The
revenue from the optimal schedule with enhanced Power-Energy Model with-
31

out degradation was 4% less than for the schedule obtained with a simplistic
Power-Energy Model. When one of the degradation models was added to the
optimization framework the estimated revenue decreased by 35%. The Voltage-
Current model was employed in [63] to determine the optimal schedule of BESS
over 36-hour optimization horizon while minimizing the electricity bill of the
user with on-site photovoltaic generation. The authors showed that this model
avoids unsafe operation compared to the power-energy model.
3.6. Transmission upgrade deferral
Another BESS application that brings signiﬁcant changes to how the long-
term planning of the power system is performed, is a deferral or replacement of
the traditional power system infrastructure – transmission lines. When BESS is
installed downstream of a congested transmission corridor it can relieve conges-
tion by discharging to meet the additional demand from the load. This is why,
BESS is considered as a virtual transmission for the future grid. The strategic
deployment of BESS can increase the asset utilization rate in the grid if it is
planned correctly [90].
The class of planning problems from the system operator perspective, where
the optimal size of BESS and its location in the grid are determined, is usually
solved with the objective to minimize the sum of the capital cost of BESS and
the operating costs of the system. A simple Power-Energy Model without degra-
dation is usually incorporated into these optimization problems. For example,
in [84], a static investment model was used to ﬁnd siting and sizing decisions
within the Western Electricity Coordinating Council interconnection by means
of the stochastic programming. Falugi and co-workers [85] studied the dynamic
planning problem of the joint transmission and BESS deployment in the IEEE
118-bus system for the planning horizon of 16 years. The optimal decision plan
was updated every four years.
32

The BESS that provides transmission services should be paid through the
rate-based compensation. However, if BESS also provides other services to the
grid it should be additionally compensated through the market. Such multiple
service operation of BESS and corresponding compensation scheme currently
face several regulatory barriers. The market model and corresponding policies
for storage as a transmission asset are investigated by several utilities [91]. The
operation strategy for energy storage that provided congestion relief service and
also obtained revenue from energy arbitrage is examined in [86]. The optimal
premium paid to the BESS owner as a rate-based compensation to relieve con-
gestion is explored in [87]. Both papers utilized a generic Power-Energy Model
without degradation.
4. Discussion
The system-level operational and planning studies predominantly employed
generic Power-Energy Models to characterize the BESS charging/discharging
performance and various empirical models to quantify degradation. The reason
for this is the simplicity and linearity of Power-Energy Models. From the re-
viewed literature it can be concluded that advanced battery models can provide
more accurate estimates for the economic potential of BESS, feasible charg-
ing/discharging schedule, and more precise projection of the capacity and charg-
ing/discharging power fading.
Several authors [37, 8, 36, 39] enhance a simplistic Power-Energy Model
with the functional dependences between energy eﬃciency, maximum charg-
ing/discharging power and state-of-energy to better model typical characteris-
tics of the lithium-ion cell. The linear approximation was applied for all men-
tioned relationships to make them solvable for the optimization problems used
in those studies. However, only in the case of [37] the ﬁnal problem was a
33

mix-integer linear problem whereas authors of [8, 36, 39] ﬁnished with a lin-
ear programming problem. The optimal schedule for BESS with a simplistic
Power-Energy Model, in general, overestimated economic valuations.
The energy arbitrage application was used for the assessment of BESS mod-
els from [37, 8, 39] whereas the frequency regulation service revenue stream was
assessed in [36]. The common drawback for these models is that they are phe-
nomenological by their nature: limited experimental data were used to ﬁt their
mathematical models for selected operating conditions. Moreover, all models
were run over the narrow optimization horizon of one to seven days. The degra-
dation of BESS was not considered as only charging/discharging performance
was an objective for the improvement. In [9], the strategic sizing of BESS with
renewable generation was not part of the problem, but they claimed a simpliﬁed
model could exaggerate the revenue by 35%. This is a signiﬁcant error in the
evaluation of the economic feasibility and may lead to misleading conclusions
in [82] where a simplistic model of BESS for planning studies was used.
An increasing number of studies for diﬀerent BESS applications such as [47]
for energy arbitrage, [53] for peak shaving, [7] for frequency regulation, and [50]
for operating reserve showed that the economic viability of the project with
BESS is not overestimated if the degradation models were used. However, vari-
ous empirical degradation formulations, which are limited by their formulation,
were used in the mentioned works.
Among three models to simulate the charging/discharging proﬁle, the Concentration-
Current Model can be seen as the most promising since it characterizes the dy-
namics of physical processes inside the cell and can be coupled with the physics-
based degradation model such as SEI formation. The cost-beneﬁt analysis of
BESS with Concentration-Current Model was performed only for a discrete bat-
tery application such as energy arbitrage in [57], frequency regulation [19], and
34

peak shaving [20]. The co-optimization of various BESS applications was not
considered when this model is employed. This high-ﬁdelity model was also not
used for optimal sizing of BESS for the transmission services or renewable in-
tegration assistance. As the optimization problem with Concentration-Current
Model is computationally expensive, authors of [20] only considered a 24 hour
interval for their case study whereas authors of [57] and [19] utilized the model
predictive control scheme for 24 hours and 1 hour respectively.
Based on these observations, several directions are suggested for future de-
velopment:
• The impact of the detailed model of BESS without degradation on the
proﬁt-maximizing operation of BESS for various grid applications was
quantiﬁed by many researchers. However, there is no consensus on how a
more detailed model is crucial for short-term operation. For example, in
[8], the high-level model overestimated the proﬁt by 20%, 4% was demon-
strated in [9], and no diﬀerence was stated by [13].
• An economic feasibility for only energy arbitrage, frequency regulation,
and peak shaving was done with the concentration-current models. The
analysis for the case of other services or several stacked application of
BESS was out of consideration.
• The physics-based model has never been considered for planning studies
as the system-level planning studies predominantly employed a generic
Power-Energy model to characterize the BESS charging/discharging per-
formance. As the lifespan of the lithium-ion cell component of a BESS
is a quarter or half of traditional transmission and generation assets, the
integration of BESS into the grid requires a multistage planning approach,
where a replacement schedule is a part of the implementation plan and
35

investment. The long-term multistage battery planning with replacement
is completely out of consideration in the literature.
• The increased number of variables and constraints in the optimization
framework brought by voltage-current and concentration-current models
should be tackled with parallel computing as it was performed for a longer
decision-making horizon with a Power-Energy model considering degrada-
tion in [12].
• The stochastic formulation of the strategic operation of BESS is a compu-
tationally expensive problem by itself. The need in using a more detailed
battery model for this optimization framework should be justiﬁed.
• A highly eﬃcient, time-saving algorithm is needed for the nonlinear opti-
mization problem of the planning and scheduling of the grid level appli-
cations if a sophisticated physics-based lithium-ion model is employed.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, three BESS models for operation with diﬀerent level of details
were reviewed and their governing equations that are appropriate for the opti-
mization framework are presented. Several degradation models were discussed
and their diﬀerences were highlighted. The comprehensive literature review of
research papers where optimal operation and planning decisions were derived
for the business cases with battery storage for various system-level applications
was performed. This research review showed that a more sophisticated battery
description ensures more accurate estimates of BESS economic beneﬁts, longer
projected lifespan and operation within safety limits. Currently, the number of
research papers with the detailed physics-based model of a BESS is limited. The
integration of such models in a broader spectrum of problems with the strategic
operation and planning presents an attractive direction for the future research.
36

References
[1] M. S. Ziegler, J. E. Trancik, Re-examining rates of lithium-ion battery
technology improvement and cost decline, Energy Environ. Sci. (2021) –.
[2] L. Mauler, F. Duﬀner, J. Leker, Economies of scale in battery cell manu-
facturing: The impact of material and process innovations, Applied Energy
286 (2021).
[3] P. Robson, D. Bonomi, Growing the battery storage market 2020, Technical
Report, 2020.
[4] The USA Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Electric storage par-
ticipation in markets operated by regional transmission organizations and
independent system operators, Technical Report, 2018.
[5] Bloomberg New Energy Finance, New Energy Outlook 2019, Technical
Report, 2019.
[6] R. Walawalkar, J. Apt, R. Mancini, Economics of electric energy storage
for energy arbitrage and regulation in New York, Energy Policy 35 (2007)
2558–2568.
[7] B. Xu, Y. Shi, D. Kirschen, B. Zhang, Optimal battery participation in
frequency regulation markets, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 33
(2018) 6715–6725.
[8] H. Pandˇ zi´ c, V. Bobanac, H. Pandzic, V. Bobanac, An Accurate Charging
Model of Battery, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 34 (2019) 1416–
1426.
[9] M. Jafari, A. Botterud, A. Sakti, Estimating revenues from oﬀshore wind-
storage systems: The importance of advanced battery models, Applied
Energy 276 (2020).
37

[10] G. Fitzgerald, J. Mandel, J. Morris, H. Touati, The Economics of Battery
Energy Storage: How multi-use, customer-sited batteries deliverthe most
services and value to customers and the grid, Technical Report, Rocky
Mountain Institute, 2015.
[11] Z. Taylor, H. Akhavan-Hejazi, H. Mohsenian-Rad, Optimal Operation of
Grid-Tied Energy Storage Systems Considering Detailed Device-Level Bat-
tery Models, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 16 (2020) 3928–
3941.
[12] F. Sorourifar, V. Zavala, A. Dowling, Integrated Multiscale Design, Mar-
ket Participation, and Replacement Strategies for Battery Energy Storage
Systems, IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 11 (2020) 84–92.
[13] J. M. Reniers, G. Mulder, D. A. Howey, Unlocking extra value from grid
batteries using advanced models, Journal of Power Sources 487 (2021)
229355.
[14] D. W. Sobieski, M. P. Bhavaraju, An economic assessment of battery
storage in electric utility systems, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems PAS-104 (1985) 3453–3459.
[15] M. Mileti´ c, H. Pandˇ zi´ c, D. Yang, Operating and investment models for
energy storage systems, Energies 13 (2020).
[16] V. Ramadesigan, P. Northrop, S. De, S. Santhanagopalan, R. Braatz,
V. Subramanian, Modeling and simulation of lithium-ion batteries from
a systems engineering perspective, Journal of the Electrochemical Society
159 (2012).
[17] J. M. Reniers, G. Mulder, D. A. Howey, Review and Performance Compari-
38

son of Mechanical-Chemical Degradation Models for Lithium-Ion Batteries,
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 166 (2019) A3189–A3200.
[18] R. Byrne, T. Nguyen, D. Copp, B. Chalamala, I. Gyuk, Energy Manage-
ment and Optimization Methods for Grid Energy Storage Systems, IEEE
Access 6 (2017) 13231–13260.
[19] Y. Cao, S. Lee, V. Subramanian, V. Zavala, Multiscale model predictive
control of battery systems for frequency regulation markets using physics-
based models, Journal of Process Control 90 (2020) 46–55.
[20] D. Rosewater, D. Copp, T. Nguyen, R. Byrne, S. Santoso, Battery Energy
Storage Models for Optimal Control, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 178357–178391.
[21] M. T. Lawder, B. Suthar, P. W. Northrop, S. De, C. M. Hoﬀ, O. Leit-
ermann, M. L. Crow, S. Santhanagopalan, V. R. Subramanian, Battery
energy storage system (BESS) and battery management system (BMS) for
grid-scale applications, Proceedings of the IEEE 102 (2014).
[22] M. S. Whittingham, Electrical energy storage and intercalation chemistry,
Science 192 (1976).
[23] K. Mizushima, P. Jones, P. Wiseman, J. Goodenough, LixCoO2 (0<x<-1):
A new cathode material for batteries of high energy density, Materials
Research Bulletin 15 (1980) 783–789.
[24] G. Plett, Battery Management Systems, Volume I: Battery Modeling,
Artech House Publishers, 2015.
[25] A. Jokar, B. Rajabloo, M. D´ esilets, M. Lacroix, Review of simpliﬁed
Pseudo-two-Dimensional models of lithium-ion batteries, Journal of Power
Sources 327 (2016) 44–55.
39

[26] M. Woody, M. Arbabzadeh, G. Lewis, G. Keoleian, A. Stefanopoulou,
Strategies to limit degradation and maximize Li-ion battery service life-
time - Critical review and guidance for stakeholders, Journal of Energy
Storage 28 (2020).
[27] J. Arteaga, H. Zareipour, V. Thangadurai, Overview of Lithium-Ion Grid-
Scale Energy Storage Systems, Current Sustainable/Renewable Energy
Reports 4 (2017).
[28] C. Birkl, M. Roberts, E. McTurk, P. Bruce, D. Howey, Degradation diag-
nostics for lithium ion cells, Journal of Power Sources 341 (2017) 373–386.
[29] E. Bainbridge, J. McNamee, D. Robinson, R. Nevison, Hydrothermal dis-
patch with pumped storage, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems PAS-85 (1966) 472–485.
[30] Y. Dvorkin, R. Fernandez-Blanco, D. Kirschen, H. Pandzic, J.-P. Watson,
C. Silva-Monroy, Ensuring Proﬁtability of Energy Storage, IEEE Transac-
tions on Power Systems 32 (2017) 611–623.
[31] B. Zhao, A. Conejo, R. Sioshansi, Using electrical energy storage to mit-
igate natural gas-supply shortages, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
33 (2018) 7076–7086.
[32] J. Arteaga, H. Zareipour, A Price-Maker/Price-Taker Model for the Opera-
tion of Battery Storage Systems in Electricity Markets, IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid 10 (2019).
[33] J. A. Taylor, Financial storage rights, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
30 (2015).
[34] R. Go, F. Munoz, J.-P. Watson, Assessing the economic value of co-
40

optimized grid-scale energy storage investments in supporting high renew-
able portfolio standards, Applied Energy 183 (2016) 902–913.
[35] A. Perez, R. Moreno, R. Moreira, M. Orchard, G. Strbac, Eﬀect of Battery
Degradation on Multi-Service Portfolios of Energy Storage, IEEE Trans-
actions on Sustainable Energy 7 (2016) 1718–1729.
[36] S. Vagropoulos, A. Bakirtzis, Optimal bidding strategy for electric vehicle
aggregators in electricity markets, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
28 (2013) 4031–4041.
[37] A. Sakti, K. Gallagher, N. Sepulveda, C. Uckun, C. Vergara, F. de Sisternes,
D. Dees, A. Botterud, Enhanced representations of lithium-ion batteries in
power systems models and their eﬀect on the valuation of energy arbitrage
applications, Journal of Power Sources 342 (2017) 279–291.
[38] T. A. Nguyen, D. A. Copp, R. H. Byrne, B. R. Chalamala, Market Eval-
uation of Energy Storage Systems Incorporating Technology-Speciﬁc Non-
linear Models, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 34 (2019) 3706–3715.
[39] A. Gonzalez-Castellanos, D. Pozo, A. Bischi, Detailed Li-ion battery char-
acterization model for economic operation, International Journal of Elec-
trical Power and Energy Systems 116 (2020) 105561.
[40] H. Mohsenian-Rad, Optimal bidding, scheduling, and deployment of bat-
tery systems in California day-ahead energy market, IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 31 (2016).
[41] R. Fares, M. Webber, What are the tradeoﬀs between battery energy
storage cycle life and calendar life in the energy arbitrage application?,
Journal of Energy Storage 16 (2018) 37–45.
41

[42] F. Wankm¨ uller, P. Thimmapuram, K. Gallagher, A. Botterud, Impact
of battery degradation on energy arbitrage revenue of grid-level energy
storage, Journal of Energy Storage 10 (2017) 56–66.
[43] ´A. Arcos-Vargas, D. Canca, F. N´ u˜ nez, Impact of battery technological
progress on electricity arbitrage: An application to the Iberian market,
Applied Energy 260 (2020).
[44] G. He, Q. Chen, P. Moutis, S. Kar, J. Whitacre, An intertemporal decision
framework for electrochemical energy storage management, Nature Energy
3 (2018) 404–412.
[45] B. Xu, A. Oudalov, A. Ulbig, G. Andersson, D. Kirschen, Modeling of
lithium-ion battery degradation for cell life assessment, IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid 9 (2018) 1131–1140.
[46] B. Xu, J. Zhao, T. Zheng, E. Litvinov, D. Kirschen, Factoring the Cycle
Aging Cost of Batteries Participating in Electricity Markets, IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems 33 (2018) 2248–2259.
[47] A. Maheshwari, N. Paterakis, M. Santarelli, M. Gibescu, Optimizing the
operation of energy storage using a non-linear lithium-ion battery degra-
dation model, Applied Energy 261 (2020).
[48] Y. Shi, B. Xu, Y. Tan, B. Zhang, A Convex Cycle-based Degradation
Model for Battery Energy Storage Planning and Operation, Proceedings
of the American Control Conference 2018-June (2018) 4590–4596.
[49] G. He, Q. Chen, C. Kang, P. Pinson, Q. Xia, Optimal Bidding Strategy of
Battery Storage in Power Markets Considering Performance-Based Regu-
lation and Battery Cycle Life, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 7 (2016)
2359–2367.
42

[50] N. Padmanabhan, M. Ahmed, K. Bhattacharya, Battery Energy Storage
Systems in Energy and Reserve Markets, IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems 35 (2020) 215–226.
[51] E. Redondo-Iglesias, P. Venet, S. Pelissier, Eﬃciency Degradation Model of
Lithium-Ion Batteries for Electric Vehicles, IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications 55 (2019).
[52] G. He, R. Ciez, P. Moutis, S. Kar, J. Whitacre, The economic end of life
of electrochemical energy storage, Applied Energy 273 (2020).
[53] S. F. Schneider, P. Novak, T. Kober, Rechargeable batteries for simultane-
ous demand peak shaving and price arbitrage business, IEEE Transactions
on Sustainable Energy XX (2020) 1–1.
[54] Z. Geng, S. Wang, M. J. Lacey, D. Brandell, T. Thiringer, Bridging physics-
based and equivalent circuit models for lithium-ion batteries, Electrochim-
ica Acta 372 (2021) 137829.
[55] X. Hu, S. Li, H. Peng, A comparative study of equivalent circuit models
for Li-ion batteries, Journal of Power Sources 198 (2012) 359–367.
[56] V. Ovejas, A. Cuadras, Eﬀects of cycling on lithium-ion battery hysteresis
and overvoltage, Scientiﬁc Reports 9 (2019).
[57] J. Reniers, G. Mulder, S. Ober-Bl¨ obaum, D. Howey, Improving optimal
control of grid-connected lithium-ion batteries through more accurate bat-
tery and degradation modelling, Journal of Power Sources 379 (2018) 91–
102.
[58] Z. B. Omariba, L. Zhang, D. Sun, Review of Battery Cell Balancing
Methodologies for Optimizing Battery Pack Performance in Electric Ve-
hicles, IEEE Access 7 (2019).
43

[59] T. L. Fantham, D. T. Gladwin, Impact of cell balance on grid scale battery
energy storage systems, in: Energy Reports, volume 6, 2020. doi: 10.1016/
j.egyr.2020.03.026.
[60] A. Berrueta, A. Urtasun, A. Urs´ ua, P. Sanchis, A comprehensive model for
lithium-ion batteries: From the physical principles to an electrical model,
Energy 144 (2018) 286–300.
[61] M. Varini, P. Campana, G. Lindbergh, A semi-empirical, electrochemistry-
based model for Li-ion battery performance prediction over lifetime, Jour-
nal of Energy Storage 25 (2019).
[62] Y. Li, M. Vilathgamuwa, S. Choi, T. Farrell, N. Tran, J. Teague, Develop-
ment of a degradation-conscious physics-based lithium-ion battery model
for use in power system planning studies, Applied Energy 248 (2019) 512–
525.
[63] P. Aaslid, F. Geth, M. Korp˚ as, M. M. Belsnes, O. B. Fosso, Non-linear
charge-based battery storage optimization model with bi-variate cubic
spline constraints, Journal of Energy Storage 32 (2020) 101979.
[64] A. W¨ achter, L. T. Biegler, On the implementation of an interior-point ﬁlter
line-search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming, Mathematical
Programming 106 (2006).
[65] A. M. Bizeray, J. H. Kim, S. R. Duncan, D. A. Howey, Identiﬁability and
Parameter Estimation of the Single Particle Lithium-Ion Battery Model,
IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 27 (2018) 1862–1877.
[66] J. Newman, W. Tiedemann, Porous-electrode theory with battery applica-
tions, AIChE Journal 21 (1975) 25–41.
44

[67] G. Ning, B. Popov, Cycle life modeling of lithium-ion batteries, Journal of
the Electrochemical Society 151 (2004).
[68] A. P. Schmidt, M. Bitzer, ´A. W. Imre, L. Guzzella, Experiment-driven
electrochemical modeling and systematic parameterization for a lithium-
ion battery cell, Journal of Power Sources 195 (2010).
[69] M. Guo, G. Sikha, R. White, Single-particle model for a lithium-ion cell:
Thermal behavior, Journal of the Electrochemical Society 158 (2011).
[70] V. Subramanian, J. Ritter, R. White, Approximate Solutions for Galvano-
static Discharge of Spherical Particles: I. Constant Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient,
Journal of the Electrochemical Society 148 (2001).
[71] C. Wang, W. Gu, B. Liaw, Micro-macroscopic coupled modeling of batteries
and fuel cells: I. Model development, Journal of the Electrochemical Society
145 (1998) 3407–3417.
[72] C. Liu, Z. Neale, G. Cao, Understanding electrochemical potentials of
cathode materials in rechargeable batteries, Materials Today 19 (2016)
109–123.
[73] M. Pinsona, M. Bazant, Theory of SEI formation in rechargeable batteries:
Capacity fade, accelerated aging and lifetime prediction, Journal of the
Electrochemical Society 160 (2013).
[74] P. Ramadass, B. Haran, P. Gomadam, R. White, B. Popov, Development
of First Principles Capacity Fade Model for Li-Ion Cells, Journal of the
Electrochemical Society 151 (2004).
[75] H. Perez, X. Hu, S. Moura, Optimal charging of batteries via a single
particle model with electrolyte and thermal dynamics, in: Proceedings of
45

the American Control Conference, volume 2016-July, 2016, pp. 4000–4005.
doi:10.1109/ACC.2016.7525538.
[76] A. Gailani, M. Al-Greer, M. Short, T. Crosbie, N. Dawood, Lifetime degra-
dation cost analysis for Li-ion batteries in capacity markets using accurate
physics-based models, Energies 13 (2020).
[77] A. D. Lamont, Assessing the economic value and optimal structure of large-
scale electricity storage, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 28 (2013)
911–921.
[78] A. Awad, J. Fuller, T. El-Fouly, M. Salama, Impact of energy storage sys-
tems on electricity market equilibrium, IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Energy 5 (2014) 875–885.
[79] Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, W. Tang, S. Low, Proﬁt-maximizing planning and
control of battery energy storage systems for primary frequency control,
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9 (2018) 712–723.
[80] D. Zhu, Y.-J. Zhang, Optimal coordinated control of multiple battery en-
ergy storage systems for primary frequency regulation, IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 34 (2019) 555–565.
[81] M. Dicorato, G. Forte, M. Pisani, M. Trovato, Planning and operating
combined wind-storage system in electricity market, IEEE Transactions on
Sustainable Energy 3 (2012).
[82] S. Bhattacharjee, R. Sioshansi, H. Zareipour, Beneﬁts of Strategically Siz-
ing Wind-Integrated Energy Storage and Transmission, IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems (2020).
[83] H. Shin, J. H. Roh, Framework for Sizing of Energy Storage System Supple-
46

menting Photovoltaic Generation in Consideration of Battery Degradation,
IEEE Access 8 (2020).
[84] R. Fern´ andez-Blanco, Y. Dvorkin, B. Xu, Y. Wang, D. Kirschen, Optimal
Energy Storage Siting and Sizing: A WECC Case Study, IEEE Transac-
tions on Sustainable Energy 8 (2017) 733–743.
[85] P. Falugi, I. Konstantelos, G. Strbac, Planning with Multiple Transmission
and Storage Investment Options under Uncertainty: A Nested Decomposi-
tion Approach, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 33 (2018) 3559–3572.
[86] H. Khani, M. Zadeh, A. Hajimiragha, Transmission Congestion Relief Us-
ing Privately Owned Large-Scale Energy Storage Systems in a Competitive
Electricity Market, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 31 (2016) 1449–
1458.
[87] J. Arteaga, H. Zareipour, N. Amjady, Energy storage as a service: Optimal
sizing for transmission congestion relief, Applied Energy 298 (2021) 117095.
[88] F. Graves, T. Jenkin, D. Murphy, Opportunities for Electricity Storage in,
The Electricity Journal 12 (1999) 46–56.
[89] The USA Energy Information Administration, Battery storage in the
United States: an update on market trends, Technical Report, 2020.
[90] H. Pandzic, Y. Wang, T. Qiu, Y. Dvorkin, D. S. Kirschen, Near-Optimal
Method for Siting and Sizing of Distributed Storage in a Transmission
Network, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 30 (2015).
[91] California Independent System Operator, Second Revised Straw Proposal:
Storage as a Transmission Asset, Technical Report, 2018.
47