Decision-Focused Forecasting:
A Differentiable
Multistage Optimisation Architecture
Egon Peršak E.Persak@sms.ed.ac.uk
School of Mathematics
University of Edinburgh
Miguel F. Anjos
School of Mathematics
University of Edinburgh
Abstract
Most decision-focused learning work has focused on single stage problems
whereas many real-world decision problems are more appropriately modelled
using multistage optimisation. In multistage problems contextual information
is revealed over time, decisions have to be taken sequentially, and decisions now
have an intertemporal effect on future decisions. Decision-focused forecasting
is a recurrent differentiable optimisation architecture that expresses a fully
differentiable multistage optimisation approach. This architecture enables
us to account for the intertemporal decision effects of forecasts. We show
what gradient adjustments are made to account for the state-path caused by
forecasting. We apply the model to multistage problems in energy storage
arbitrage and portfolio optimisation and report that our model outperforms
existing approaches.
1 Introduction
Many real world decision problems are recurrent and decisions taken now have a bearing on
future decisions. Since information about such problems is revealed over time it is preferable
to model them as having multiple stages so each set of decisions considers the most recently
available contextual information. The broad utility of being able to systematically solve such
problems is obvious. It is utilised as a core decision making technology in applications as
varied as energy systems planning, finance, radiotherapy, and supply chain management.
The mathematical optimisation of multistage problems is computationally intense and often
relies on specialised decomposition algorithms due to the size of real-world problems and
scenario trees needed to capture them. This is further complicated by the fact that problem
parameters are often not known before decisions have to be made and that prediction in the
time series domain is famously difficult.
1
arXiv:2405.14719v2  [math.OC]  28 May 2025

The multistage setting inherits the alignment problem of contextual optimisation: the perfor-
mance on the prediction task is not necessarily aligned with performance on the downstream
decision task. Decisions are often highly sensitive to errors in problem parametrisation.
This alignment problem is hard to account for a priori to the decision task as we do not
have access to the conditional distribution of the unknown parameters. Decision-focused
learning emerged to solve the alignment problem problem by training predictive pipelines
with respect to downstream decision performance and in doing so implicitly learning the
contextual sensitivity structure of the problem. In the case of multistage optimisation the
prediction problem is harder and decision taken now propagate to future decision-making
exacerbating the alignment problem.
We propose a model that expresses the deterministic policy multistage optimisation approach
as a fully differentiable computation to tackle the alignment problem in multistage decision
problems. The deterministic policy approach is a simple approach in which only one predic-
tion/forecast is made at each stage. The relative ease of computation in this approach enables
the use of differentiable optimisation and consequently an extension of the decision-focused
paradigm to multistage problems.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose the first decision-focused model for continual multistage optimisation
problems. Our model expresses a fully differentiable deterministic policy approach to
multistage optimisation.
• We analyse the gradients computed by our model to illustrate why this method
improves on conventional DFL in multistage settings. In contrast to conventional
DFL our approach adjusts for the state-path the prediction model causes enabling
intertemporal alignment.
• We present two experiments in which we implement our model and show it successfully
compares with DFL and the more conventional prediction-focused approach.
2 Background
Setting We focus on structured decision problems under parameter uncertainty which have
to be resolved over discrete time. The temporal structure of the process is as follows: at
staget we have an existing statest−1∈R|s| and access to contextzt∈R ct. We need to make
decisions xt∈R d before the uncertain parametersθt∈R p for the stage are revealed. This
temporal structure is often referred to as here-and-now decisions. We assume the state is
certain so not determined by the realisation ofθt−1 and that the uncertainty is only in the
objective. The state is a subset of decision variablesst⊆xt. The contextzt is a catch-all
term which includes all past realisations of the unknown parameters and previous auxiliary
contexts. The decisions at each stage are constrained to a setxt∈X t(st−1) determined
only by the previous state. We restrict ourselves to sets which are expressible with convex
optimisation compliant constraints. We assume that this set is non-empty for any value of
s also known as relatively complete recourse. The decisions at each stage are scored using
2

a stage-wise objective function determined by the uncertain parameters which we denote
as f(xt,θt). Let the indext :t +H− 1 denote the matrix of variables corresponding toH
stages t to t +H− 1 for examplext:t+H−1∈R d×H. Assuming a risk neutral decision maker
the decision task for a task horizon ofH stages is:
minxt:t+H−1
E
θt:t+H−1
[∑H−1
i=0 f(xt+i,θt+i)
]
s.t. xt+i∈X t+i(st+i−1) ∀i∈{ 0 :H− 1}
(1)
This problem is difficult to solve even when the exact (conditional) distribution ofθt:t+h−1 is
known for all but the simplest distributions. In practiceθt is a multivariate time series with
complex dependency structures making problem (1) intractable. Multistage optimisation is
primarily concerned with finding good approximations to this problem.
Multistage Optimisation The multistage optimisation method zoo is vast and there is
no dominant method as tasks differ in nature and scope. The expectation is approximated
using sampling which can be simple or have more intricate structure such as scenario trees.
In multi-scenario approaches a significant feature are non-anticipativity constraints meaning
decision variables have to take the same value in each scenario for a given stage. Methods
differ by how many scenarios they consider and how they treat non-anticipativity constraints
(Wang et al., 2022). The simplest multistage optimisation approach is having a single scenario
at each stage known as the deterministic policy approach. Two-stage approaches relax
non-anticipativity constraints for stages after the current stage meaning the decisions taken
now reflect flexibility later. Multi-scenario approaches increase the problem size with the
number of scenarios in terms on the number of constraints and the number of variables
in the case of two-stage approaches. The increased problem size often requires the use of
decomposition algorithms. A popular family of approaches constrains possible future decision
making to linear decision rules, which results in a significantly easier optimisation problem.
The distribution of the unknown parameters is typically not known and has to be estimated
based on past observations of context and realisations. The forecasting problem with a
forecast horizon ofh is finding a mappingmh(zt;W ) = ˆθt:t+h−1 which optimises some loss
criterion when compared with true realisationsθt:t+h−1. We useW to denote the learnable
parameters of the prediction model. This prediction problem is difficult due to the nature of
the data generating process (DGP) in time series. The unknown parametersθt are typically
highly temporally dependent (either locally or periodically) and the dynamics of the DGP
often change over time (non-stationarity). Time series tend to have fewer observations
available than other learning tasks. Forecasting is difficult even for single scenario point
estimates, forecasting/simulating multiple scenarios is even more challenging.
Given that new contextual information is available at each stage it is sensible to update
the forecast and solve the problem approximation at each stage to obtain decisions for
the current stage. This also provides a solution to problems which are continual and do
not have a finite task horizon. Since solving and infinite horizon problem directly is not
computationally tractable we instead tackle it by repeatedly solving the same problem but
only for the stages in a set fixed planning horizon. We refer to this clipped version of the
problem as the planning problem. We denote the planning horizon ash to distinguish it
3

from the task horizonh≤H. Minor adjustments are often added to the planning problem
to reflect the continual nature of the overall task such as forcing the final state to be the
same as the initial state or assigning value to the terminal state. Determining the optimal
planning horizon in contextual multistage optimisation is a hard problem as it has to balance
the myopia of decision planning with the limited predictability of unknown parameters for
longer forecasting horizons.
Decision-F ocused Learning The key difficulty in contextual optimisation is that the per-
formance on the prediction task does not necessarily align with performance the decision task.
This alignment depends on the local sensitivity of the optimal solution to errors in prediction
and the unobserved conditional uncertainty of the DGP. Even very low generalisation error
in prediction models can result in highly suboptimal decision making. It is hard to account
for the alignment factors ex ante analytically due to combinatorially large feasible spaces and
lack of information about the DGP. Decision-focused learning (DFL) solves this alignment
problem by explicitly training the prediction model for performance on the decision task.
DFL models learn the contextual alignment dynamics of the decision problem. We use regret
as our measure for decision quality. LetF be the whole objective function andx∗(ˆθ) the
optimal solution given parametersˆθ, regret is defined as how much objective value is lost as
a result of our prediction versus having perfect information:
Lregret =F (x∗(ˆθ),θ )−F (x∗(θ),θ ) (2)
Mathematically optimising for this loss function is difficult because it requires differentiating
across an implicit functionx∗ which has anarg min operator. Differentiable optimisation
(DO) has seen a lot of recent attention (Amos & Kolter, 2017; Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2022;
Mandi et al., 2023). Our examples contend with quadratic programming (QP) problems
for which gradients can be obtained analytically by solving a linear system of optimality
condition differentials. In our implementation we employ cvxpylayers (Agrawal et al., 2019a),
which extends this method to general conic programs (Agrawal et al., 2019b) of which QP is
a special case. Not all DO methods can be used as a layer as some compute or approximate
∂L
∂ˆθ instead of ∂x∗
∂ˆθ for efficiency or mathematical reasons. We refer to methods which can be
used as a layer as implicit layers. Mandi et al. (2023) present an excellent recent survey on
the area. From now on we use the notationx∗ :Rp×h↦→Rd×h for differentiable optimisation
layers andx∗
t∈R d to as the solution for the current statet.
In multistage optimisation decisions taken now have an effect on downstream decision making.
In our setting this is transmitted by the state variables. The intertemporal effect makes
the alignment problem harder as errors in prediction now also have an effect on decisions
later. Extending the decision-focused paradigm to multistage problems is therefore highly
desirable. This work does not develop new DO methods, instead proposing decision-focused
forecasting (DFF) a novel neural architecture composed of many implicit layers which
expresses multistage optimisation in a fully differentiable computation. We express the
simplest multistage optimisation approach: deterministic policy. This choice is motivated by
two factors: the relative difficulty of learning simulators compared to point predictors, and
the fact that implicit layers typically require at least one solver call per instance making the
4

larger multi-scenario optimisation problems computationally burdensome. Our architecture
is extendable to two-stage multistage approaches with the use of differentiable simulators.
2.1 Existing Work
There have been limited attempts to extend DFL to multistage settings. Hu et al. (2024a)
propose a two-stage approach for solving mixed-integer linear programs with parameter
uncertainty in constraints. They focus on problems where recourse is available after the
observation of true parameters and model this by adding a second stage penalty function
which reflect the cost of the recourse adjustment to feasibility. While originally designed for
packing and covering linear programs the framework generalises to the simplest multistage
optimisation case of a single scenario with two stages. This approach was later extended in
Hu et al. (2024b) to finite multistage settings by training a decision-focused prediction model
for each stage. It is not clear how well this non-recursive architecture extends to continual
settings.
Deterministic policy approaches are highly reminiscent of model predictive control (MDP)
from engineering. Differentiable optimisation has been applied to learn the structure of model
predictive control problems (East et al., 2020). The objective of the learning in MDP is a set
of parameters directly describing the problem dynamics using imitation learning whereas we
aim to learn how to contextually predict problem parameters.
Some multistage stochastic optimisation approaches integrate contextual/covariate/side
information. Ban et al. (2019) use a regularised regression model to construct scenario trees
informed by contextual information. This approach is not decision-focused but provides great
insight in how to construct scenario trees for cold-start forecasting problems. Bertsimas et al.
(2023) use non-parametric machine learning approaches to assess similarity between a given
context and contexts in the training set and approximates the true problem by weighing
past realisations, which are treated as scenarios, based on the similarity score. In addition
a norm ball around each scenario is considered to account for aleatoric uncertainty. The
theoretical version of this modelling approach has nice asymptotic convergence properties.
The problem is approximated using linear decision rules in a two-stage manner allowing for
multiple policies. This approach is more decision-focused but completely relies on existing
observations being sufficiently similar to future observations. It does not attempt to learn the
latent structure of the DGP to generalise to new contexts which is necessary in situations
with limited data.
Multistage optimisation problems can be cast as Markov decision problems and therefore
solved with (deep) reinforcement learning (RL). Given the structure of the problem is known
exactly an RL approach is at a disadvantage since it has to learn the problem dynamics
implicitly in value/action/policy functions on top of the alignment dynamics. Generally RL
is used in multistage decision problems when the structure of the problem is not known
exactly but interactions with the problem environment can be simulated/observed or the
problem size is computationally intractable. For a more complete discussion of approaches to
sequential decision making we refer the reader to the unified framework proposed by Powell
(2022).
5

Figure 1: DFF: A deterministic policy approach expressed as a recurrent neural architecture.
3 Decision-Focused Forecasting
The iterated optimisation in multistage approaches for continual problems can be expressed
as a recurrent neural architecture. In the deterministic policy approach an optimisation
problem with a planning horizon ofh solved at staget contains two groups of uncertain
parameters: the current statest−1 which is part of the solution to the previous stage and
the forecast ˆθt:t+h−1 based on the contextzt at the current stage. We can express this as a
neural architecture by using a DO layer as a recurrent layer which takes as inputs a part
of the output of the previous layer and the outputs of a prediction model. We name this
recurrent architecture decision-focused forecasting (DFF). Note that the DO layer does not
contain any learnable parameters and that the learning is restricted to the forecasting model
parameterised byW. The architecture is illustrated in Figure 1.
We want to derive a policy driven by forecasts which performs well on a continual version of
the problem. In most cases we only have one continual observation of the underlying process.
The crux of DFF is passing gradient information across stages. The training scheme therefore
has to balance having enough different shorter tasks with each task featuring enough stages
to express intertemporal effects. We use a sliding window approach to partition a series into
H−h−l +1 different subtasks.h is the planning horizon and we also use it as our forecasting
horizon. Thel is the lookback horizon of how many most recent past stages we include as
context. For convenience we set the task horizon of each subtask ash. Note that the length
of each individual subtask horizon can be made longer or shorter than the planning horizon,
we did not experiment with what effect that would have on training but speculate that the
generalisation of the method could be improved by training on multiple subtask horizons.
We fix the initial state as a constant which is the same for all subtasks. This is not wholly
representable of the problem and one potential way the training set of subtasks could be
bolstered is by generating multiple valid initial states for each subtask. The pseudocode for
DFF is presented in algorithm 1. Note the recursive nature of the computation: the decision
x∗
t+h−1 directly depends on the forecastˆθt+h−1:t+2h−2 and recursively through previous states
on all previous forecasts.
6

Algorithm 1 Epoch of DFF Training
Model Components: forecasting modelmh(z;W ),
optimisation layerx∗(s, ˆθ).
Input: planning horizonh, problem horizonH, contextzt:t+H−1, true parametersθt:t+H−1,
batch sizeB, learning rateη.
repeat
DrawB indices from 0 to H− 1−h without replacement.
Initialise initial statesst+b−1 for b∈B .
Forward: {Batched for subtasks inB}
for i = 0 to h− 1 do
ψ =t +b +i.
mh(zψ) = ˆθψ:ψ+h−1 {Forecast}
x∗
ψ(sψ−1, ˆθψ:ψ+h−1) =xψ {Optimisation}
Savexψ and sψ⊆xψ.
return: x b =xt+b:t+b+h−1, Θb =θt+b:t+b+h−1
Backward:
L =F (xb, Θb)
ω =t +b +h− 1
∂L
∂W = 1
|B|
∑
b∈B
∂
∂W
[∑h−1
i=0 f(xω−i,θw−i)
]
where xω−i =x∗
ω−i(sω−i−1,mh(zω−i,W ))
W←W−η ∂L
∂W
until All indices drawn
3.1 Analysis of Gradients
Differentiating through this sequential, forecast determined optimisation procedure results in
much more complex gradients compared to conventional DFL. The prediction model weights
are optimised using gradient descent which relies on estimating the gradient∂L
∂W. We analyse
the computation of this gradient for a subtask starting at staget. Since the objective function
is additive we can express it as:
∂L
∂W =
h−1∑
i=0
∂f (xt+i,θt+i)
∂W (3)
Denote the forecast forh stages at staget +i as ˆθt+i:t+i+h−1 = ˆΘt+i. The term fori = 0 is
the most straightforward case as the initial statest−1 is a constant.
∂f (xt,θt)
∂W = ∂f (x∗
t (mh(zt;W ),st−1),θt)
∂W = (4)
= ∂f (xt,θt)
∂xt
∂x∗
t (st−1, ˆΘt)
∂W (5)
∂x∗
t
∂W = ∂x∗
t (st−1, ˆΘt)
∂ ˆΘt
∂mh(xt;W )
∂W (6)
7

The difficult term to compute is the DO Jacobian∂x∗
∂ ˆΘ: determining how changes in predicted
parameters affect the solution to the optimisation problem. Note that only keeping a subset of
the decisions from an optimisation layer is equivalent to all other decisions always mapping to
0 in the loss function and thus not being relevant in the gradient computation. Fori≥ 1 the
input st+i−1 to the optimisation layer recursively depends on previous forecasts and decisions.
We state the gradient terms fori≥ 1 recursively:
∂f (xt+i,θt+i)
∂W = ∂f (xt+i,θt+i)
∂xt+i
∂x∗
t+i(st+i−1, ˆΘt+i)
∂W (7)
∂x∗
t+i
∂W = ∂x∗
t+i
∂ ˆΘt+i
∂mh(zt+i;W )
∂W + ∂x∗
t+i
∂st+i−1
∂s∗
t+i−1
∂W (8)
State-Path Gradient Adjustment Everything up to equation (8) is the same as for
conventional DFL. Our model differs by adding the term
∂x∗
t+i
∂st+i−1
∂s∗
t+i−1
∂W . We name this gradient
adjustment the state-path adjustment. It accounts for the downstream decision effects of
previous forecasting transmitted through the state variables. The state-path adjustment
reflects that the forecasts have intertemporal effects. The adjustment term is recursive so the
state-path adjustment will consist of an increasing number of terms for later stage decisions
in a given subtask. This additional computation is needed to account for the propagation
of intertemporal alignment errors in this recursive model. The state-path links the stages
and enables the network to learn to induce policies which are future-decision-focused. The
adjustment requires additional computation compared to conventional DFL with uncertainty
in the objective as the intertemporal gradient
∂x∗
t+i
∂st+i−1
would not be computed.
Intertemporal Gradient For this analysis we restrict ourselves to settings which permit
analytic differentiation. Analytic DO gradients are obtained by solving a linear system of the
differentials of the KKT optimality conditions. The expensive aspect of this computation
is that one solver call is required to obtain the linear system. Solving the linear system to
obtain
∂x∗
t+i
∂st+i−1
in addition to the usual DFL gradient
∂x∗
t+i
∂ ˆΘt+i
is relatively inexpensive.
The constraintxt+i∈X t+i(st+i−1) for the problem at staget +i is parameterised by the
solution to the previous stage. Analytic differentiation of convex optimisation problems
with respect to parameters in constraints is well known (Amos & Kolter, 2017; Agrawal
et al., 2019b). The constraint set is composed of equalities and inequalities. Inequality
constraints can lead to instability in DFF training as they are not necessarily active. In
the optimal solution the intertemporal gradient
∂x∗
t+i
∂sL
t+i−1
for the subset of state variables
sL
t+i−1⊆st+i−1 which are not part of any active constraints is a zero matrix. This is because
small perturbations to those constraints will not change the optimal solution. Conversely,
the intertemporal gradient is almost always a non-zero matrix when the constraints are
active. If the optimal solution given true parameters has a non-emptysL
t+i−1 then there is no
intertemporal effect forsL
t+i−1 at that stage. However, if the predicted parameters result in a
solution in which some ofsL
t+i−1 are part of active constraints the estimated intertemporal
gradient for those variables is non-zero. This mismatch is likely given a random initialisation
of the prediction model. The recursive nature of the state-path adjustment means the effect
8

of this mismatch is potentially substantial and can lead to instability in training. We do not
implement this but note that at the cost of one extra solver call per stage (substantial) the
intertemporal gradient at that stage could be set to0 for state variables not exhibiting an
intertemporal effect in the optimal solution given true parameters.
4 Experiments
4.1 Battery Storage
The battery storage arbitrage task is an evolved version of the third experiment in Donti
et al. (2017). The code implementation is available here. At each stage a decision has to
be made about how much to charge or discharge a battery over the next hour in advance of
knowing the market price. The price needs to be predicted based on the available context
at each stage. The objective is to maximise trading profit over time with problem specific
penalties. The original experiment applied DFL in the setting of a single stage stochastic
programming approach with an assumption on the distribution of prices. Our version evolves
the experiment to a continual setting by adding a term which approximates terminal value at
the end of the planning horizon and evaluates the resulting policy on a rolling basis over the
test set.
Task Details We set a planning horizon ofh = 48. At each staget we need to decide
how much energy to chargexin
t or discharge xout
t . This determines our statest which reflects
how much energy is stored in the battery at the end of the stage. In addition to maximising
profit the objective contains quadratic penalties on the size ofxin
t , xout
t as larger movements
are worse for battery health, a quadratic penalty on how far the state is from being half-full
which acts as guidance to promote being in more reactive states, and an adjustment to reflect
the continual nature of the problem. The planning problemx∗ at staget given predicted
parameters ˆθt:t+h−1 and the initial statest−1 is:
x∗(st−1, ˆΘt) = arg min
s,xin,xout
∑h−1
i=0 (ˆθt+i[xin
i − xout
i ]
+λ[si− B
2 ]2 +ϵ[xin
i ]2
+ϵ[xout
i ]2)
+ˆθt+h−1st+h−1
s.t. s−1 =st−1
∀i∈ 0,...,h − 1 si = si−1 +γxin
i − xout
i
0≤ si≤B
0≤zin
i ≤cin,
0≤zout
i ≤cout.
(9)
Where λ = 0.1 is the penalty parameter for being away from a flexible state,ϵ = 0.05
penalises faster charging and discharging in the name of battery health, andγ = 0.9 is the
charging efficiency parameter. The final term in the objective is the value of the energy
currently stored at market prices, an approximation of the value of the terminal state. The
9

equality constraints describe the charging and discharging dynamics from stage to stage. The
inequality constraints describe the limits to chargingcin = 0.5, dischargingcout = 0.2 and the
total battery capacityB = 1. We set the initial state value of each planning problem asB
2.
We predict the prices ˆΘt ∈ R48 based on a contextual input zt which is composed of
observed past and some predicted variables of prices and temperature. Another important
hyperparameter is the lookback horizonl: the number of most recent stages from which
parameter realisations are taken as context. In this task we setl to be the same as the
forecast horizonh. All inputs are normalised before being passed into the neural network
mh(zt;W ) = ˆΘt. We use a simple feedforward neural network with two hidden layers. We
set the latent dimension to be2h, use ReLU activation functions, and dropout of0.1 after
the hidden layers. This is by no means an endorsement of such networks for forecasting in
practice. DFF can be employed with any differentiable forecasting architecture.
T raining and Evaluation From the 6 years of available hourly data for electricity prices we
use the first0.8 of the data for training and the remainder for testing leading to approximately
42k subtasks in the training set. While the training is performed on subtasks, the evaluation
on the test set is for the policy produced by the model across the entire task horizon. The
test problem contains just over10k stages or just over 14 months of energy storage arbitrage.
For DFF we train the model for 8 epochs on an Apple M2 using the Adam optimiser
with a batch size of64 subtasks using a learning rate of1e−3. In addition we train two
more prediction models with the same neural architecture: a two-stage (2S) model which
is optimised for RMSE scored prediction performance, and a DFL model optimised for
empirical regret but treating each subtask as a separate single stage optimisation problem.
We evaluate the policies from the models for comparison in two ways: ’S’ means we only
make decisions everyh stages effectively partitioning the continual problem into separate
single stage problems and ’M’ reflecting the same multistage approach employed in DFF
where only the decisions for a given stage are made at that stage. This is to check that
there is no bias against DFL as it was not trained for the M setting. A training run of8
epochs across all three models took about a day on average. An epoch of DFF training
took approximately five times as long as DFL training, whereas the training time for 2S is
insignificant in comparison. To account for the additional computation performed in DFF
due to its recursive gradients we trained 2S and DFL for a total of50 epochs.
Results We present the results for the task in Figure 2. We performed the experiment 5
times and display the 2-sigma error bars. DFF trains much faster. This can be explained by
the state-path adjustments which can be interpreted as increasing the batch size. Even with
the additional 42 epochs the other two approaches do not even begin to approach the DFF
results. The variance of DFF policy results diminishes significantly after about five epochs
potentially indicating some form of convergence on this task. 2S approaches outperform DFL
approaches which indicates that intertemporal alignment is important for this task. In this
experiment mean DFF relative regret is6.7% lower than the best performing alternative 2S
M. The performance gains from training would likely continue across all models, but with
decreasing marginal gains.
10

Figure 2: Development of test losses over training on the battery storage arbitrage task.
2-sigma error bars from five training runs. 2S denotes a two stage approach. The M refers
to multistage optimisation, the S refers to single-stage optimisation. DFF was trained for 8
epochs, the other two for 50 to balance the relative intensity of computation.
Note that the battery storage arbitrage problem is an ideal problem for DFF: it exhibits a
high degree of intertemporality, its core dynamics are governed by equality constraints, and
the stochastic process of the market clearing price for electricity has a relatively high degree
of predictability. It is also made simpler by only having one uncertain parameter in every
stage.
Analysis of Forecasts We present the forecasts produced by one of the training runs in
Figure 3. The salient feature is that the forecasts produced by DFF are completely alien
in scale and shape. DFL while somewhat off in scale still largely mimics the shape of the
2S and true values. The forecasts produced by DFF appear to mostly preserve their shape
over stages. This relative stability phenomenon persists across all five experiments with each
exhibiting a unique shape.
Taking the perspective that optimisation is a layer in a broader neural architecture mapping
context to decisions the forecasts can be interpreted as latent representations. The repre-
sentations that decision-focused approaches create to parametrise decision problems reflect
something about the structure of the contextual optimisation problem. Mandi et al. (2022)
observe that DFL applied to combinatorial optimisation can be equivalently cast as a learning
to rank problem. The underlying structure expressed by decision-focused representations is
not easily interpretable, especially for complex settings like multistage optimisation. Our
hypothesis is that on this task DFF finds a stable guiding representation which is possible
due to the relative predictability of the DGP or the relative simplicity of the optimisation
problem. The model effectively finds a high performing local minimum on the planning
11

Figure 3: Forecasts produced by the tested model for the battery storage task following one
of the experiments. For DFF we also plot the forecasts for contextsi stages after the original
one to demonstrate the relative stability of the representation, a phenomenon not shared
with other models.
problem. Exploring what patterns emerge for different multistage problems may produce
new understanding about their underlying structure.
4.2 Portfolio Optimisation
Our second experiment is a portfolio optimisation problem. In contrast with the battery stor-
age problem, this problem is not ideal for DFF: it has a relatively low degree of predictability,
and its intertemporality is transient. We use a slightly modified version of the dataset from
Hoseinzade & Haratizadeh (2019) which compiles the daily returns from five large stock
indices along with a range of contextual data in the form of economic and technical indices.
We set a planning horizon ofh = 7 days and a lookback horizon ofl = 21 days. The decision
task is to allocate portfolio weightsst∈R 5 across the five indices each day such that the sum
of returns over time is maximised less a variance penalty given a set of trading constraints.
The planning problem is at staget is:
x∗(st−1, ˆΘt) = arg min
s,∆
∑h−1
i=0−ˆθt+isi +γsT
i Σsi
s.t. s−1 =st−1
∀i∈ 0,...,h − 1 ∆ i = si− si−1
1 si≤ 1 si≥ 0
∥∆i∥2≤ Λ.
(10)
The covariance matrixΣ is fixed and calculated from the training set. We set the variance
penalty γ = 1
2. The variable ∆i tracks the asset-wise changes from stage to stage. The
12

trading constraints in the penultimate line prohibit shorting or leverage. The final trading
constraint is that the change in portfolio from period to period can at most have a euclidean
distance of Λ = 0.2. This is a highly simplified and relatively arbitrary restriction on large
movements in the composition in the portfolio. Without this constraint this problem is not
intertemporal as nothing else links the stages. We note that it is an inequality constraint
which may lead to some instability in the training as outlined in the previous section. Each
subtask is initialised with a portfolio of equal weights.
In this task we predict the returns of the5 individual assets for the next7 days so ˆΘt∈R 7×5.
We use a more complex neural network with eight hidden layers which alternate between
dropout and layer normalisation. The implicit regularisation is added to stabilise training as
the DGP for asset returns exhibits a high degree of noise.
T raining and Evaluation The training set contains1.4k subtasks which are evaluated on
a test task of the final 126 days approximately corresponding to half of the trading days in a
year. We use a learning rate of1e− 4 for the 2S and DFL training, and divide the learning
rate by
√
h for DFF to roughly account for the increase in the size of the gradients as a result
of the state-path adjustment and stabilise training. We train all models for25 epochs over
15 training runs. In contrast with the battery storage task the improvements in 2S and DFL
performance do not seem to occur at a different pace to DFF which may be explainable by
the learning rate adjustment.
Results We present the evolution of performance over training in Figure 4. We note the
objective value from simply keeping the original equally weighted portfolio (EWP). The
mean test task scores from 2S oscillate around the EWP result, not exhibiting a meaningful
improvement in performance. DFL shows improvement more often and some individual
results are competitive. In contrast, mean DFF performance steadily improves after the tenth
epoch. The performance of DFF on this task is evidence that the approach has merit on
tasks with less friendly DGPs. However, the variance of DFF results is high and more work
is needed to stabilise training.
The relative stability phenomenon between DFF forecasts as observed in the battery storage
task appears to a lesser extent in this task: rough high level patterns can be deduced. This
can be interpreted to reflect the relative difficulty of this task and the relative importance of
contextual information.
5 Discussion
Training Stability The training stability in the portfolio optimisation task is poor. This
could be due to the inequality constraint defining the intertemporality which can be tackled
by looking at whether the constraint is binding in the optimal solution given true parameters
and updating the state-path gradient adjustment accordingly.
The choice of setting the subtask horizon to equal the planning horizon is likely suboptimal.
Training could be enhanced by including subtasks of varying lengths in the training set.
Furthermore, initialising subtasks with different feasible initial states should improve training
13

Figure 4: Development of test losses over training on the portfolio optimisation task. 2-sigma
error bars from15 training runs. 1/N denotes the performance of a portfolio with equal
weights.
by increasing the diversity of subtasks in the training set. These two directions alone can
increase the size of a training set by several orders of magnitude.
A natural algorithmic development would be to extend the decision-focused paradigm to
multi-scenario multistage optimisation. This would enable greater representational power on
the predictive side, enable more hedging in the planning problem, but make each planning
problem substantially more expensive computationally. One potential implementation is to
generate forecasts/scenarios with different planning horizons and solve them in the same
planning problem enabling predictive models to specialise for different degrees of foresight.
Computational Cost The model we propose is significantly slower in training and has
unfavourable scaling properties in terms of the size of the planning problem. Note that this is
not a problem at test time. Compared to DFL (which is already slow compared to 2S), each
subtask requires sequentially solvingh planning problems. For the battery storage problem,
we solve approximately2 million planning problems each epoch. Implicit layers cannot be
parallelised in the same way as ordinary layers due to the sequential nature of mathematical
optimisation. On the other hand, the planning problems solved in DFF have a high degree
of similarity. Amortised optimisation methods (Amos et al., 2023) aim to infer the optimal
solution of a problem from parameter inputs based on a set of problem solution observations
presenting a potential way of reducing computational expense in DFF training.
14

6 Conclusion
We propose and positively evaluate the first decision-focused approach for continual multistage
optimisation. The recurrent implicit layer architecture enables a prediction model to account
for the intertemporal effect of forecasts made now on decisions made later. While DFF
training is computationally expensive early results suggest a significant improvement in
performance on certain continual decision problems. The key areas for improvement are
algorithmic innovations for training stability, extending the decision-focused paradigm to
more multistage optimisation approaches, and less computationally intense DO techniques.
Decision-focused forecasting produces representations which reveal a fascinating underlying
structure of contextual multistage optimisation, the precise nature of which is yet to be
determined.
References
A. Agrawal, B. Amos, S. Barratt, S. Boyd, S. Diamond, and Z. Kolter. Differentiable convex
optimization layers. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019a.
Akshay Agrawal, Shane Barratt, Stephen Boyd, Enzo Busseti, and Walaa M Moursi. Differ-
entiating through a cone program.arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09043, 2019b.
Brandon Amos and J Zico Kolter. Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural
networks. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 136–145. PMLR, 2017.
Brandon Amos et al. Tutorial on amortized optimization.Foundations and Trends® in
Machine Learning, 16(5):592–732, 2023.
Gah-Yi Ban, Jérémie Gallien, and Adam J Mersereau. Dynamic procurement of new products
with covariate information: The residual tree method.Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management, 21(4):798–815, 2019.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Christopher McCord, and Bradley Sturt. Dynamic optimization with
side information. European Journal of Operational Research, 304(2):634–651, 2023.
Priya Donti, Brandon Amos, and J Zico Kolter. Task-based end-to-end model learning in
stochastic optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Sebastian East, Marco Gallieri, Jonathan Masci, Jan Koutnik, and Mark Cannon. Infinite-
horizon differentiable model predictive control.arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02244, 2020.
Adam N Elmachtoub and Paul Grigas. Smart “predict, then optimize”.Management Science,
68(1):9–26, 2022.
Ehsan Hoseinzade and Saman Haratizadeh. Cnnpred: Cnn-based stock market prediction
using a diverse set of variables.Expert Systems with Applications, 129:273–285, 2019.
Xinyi Hu, Jasper Lee, and Jimmy Lee. Two-stage predict+ optimize for milps with unknown
parameters in constraints.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
15

Xinyi Hu, Jasper Lee, Jimmy Lee, and Peter Stuckey. Multi-stage predict+ optimize for
(mixed integer) linear programs.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
64794–64827, 2024b.
Jayanta Mandi, Vıctor Bucarey, Maxime Mulamba Ke Tchomba, and Tias Guns. Decision-
focused learning: Through the lens of learning to rank. InInternational conference on
machine learning, pp. 14935–14947. PMLR, 2022.
Jayanta Mandi, James Kotary, Senne Berden, Maxime Mulamba, Victor Bucarey, Tias
Guns, and Ferdinando Fioretto. Decision-focused learning: Foundations, state of the art,
benchmark and future opportunities.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13565, 2023.
Warren B Powell.Reinforcement Learning and Stochastic Optimization: A Unified Framework
for Sequential Decisions. Wiley, 2022. ISBN 9781119815051.
Juyoung Wang, Mucahit Cevik, and Merve Bodur. On the impact of deep learning-based
time-series forecasts on multistage stochastic programming policies.INFOR: Information
Systems and Operational Research, 60(2):133–164, 2022.
16