Temporal-Aware Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Energy Storage Bidding in Energy and Contingency
Reserve Markets
Jinhao Li, Changlong Wang, Yanru Zhang, Member IEEE, and Hao Wang, Member IEEE
Abstract—The battery energy storage system (BESS) has
immense potential for enhancing grid reliability and security
through its participation in the electricity market. BESS often
seeks various revenue streams by taking part in multiple markets
to unlock its full potential, but effective algorithms for joint-
market participation under price uncertainties are insufficiently
explored in the existing research. To bridge this gap, we develop a
novel BESS joint bidding strategy that utilizes deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) to bid in the spot and contingency frequency
control ancillary services (FCAS) markets. Our approach lever-
ages a transformer-based temporal feature extractor to effectively
respond to price fluctuations in seven markets simultaneously
and helps DRL learn the best BESS bidding strategy in joint-
market participation. Additionally, unlike conventional “black-
box” DRL model, our approach is more interpretable and
provides valuable insights into the temporal bidding behavior of
BESS in the dynamic electricity market. We validate our method
using realistic market prices from the Australian National Elec-
tricity Market. The results show that our strategy outperforms
benchmarks, including both optimization-based and other DRL-
based strategies, by substantial margins. Our findings further
suggest that effective temporal-aware bidding can significantly
increase profits in the spot and contingency FCAS markets
compared to individual market participation.
Index Terms—Battery energy storage system, energy arbitrage,
frequency control ancillary services, deep reinforcement learning,
transformer.
I. I NTRODUCTION
As the world strives towards achieving net-zero emissions,
the adoption of variable renewable energy (VRE) sources,
such as wind and solar, has become a crucial component of
modern power systems’ decarbonization efforts [1]. However,
the inherently stochastic nature of VRE presents challenges in
maintaining power system reliability and security [2]. System
reliability refers to the ability of a power system to meet
consumer demand at all times, while system security refers
to the ability of the system to operate and remain stable in
the event of a contingency. In response to the integration
challenges posed by VRE, the deployment of grid-scale and
This work was supported in part by the Australian Research Council
(ARC) Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) under Grant
DE230100046. (Corresponding author: Hao Wang.)
J. Li and H. Wang are with the Department of Data Science and AI, Faculty
of IT and Monash Energy Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800,
Australia (e-mails: {jinhao.li, hao.wang2}@monash.edu).
C. Wang is with the Department of Civil Engineering, Monash University,
Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia (e-mail: chang.wang@monash.edu).
Y . Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China,
611731 (e-mail: yanruzhang@uestc.edu.cn).
community-scale battery energy storage systems (BESS) has
increased in recent years. For example, the world’s first grid-
scale lithium-ion BESS was installed in Australia in 2017,
and after five years of successful operation, its role in the
modern power system has become increasingly apparent to
policymakers. As a result, policymakers have taken proactive
measures to promote the deployment of BESS. Notably, the
Victorian Government in Australia has introduced energy
storage targets aiming to achieve a total capacity of 2.6GW
by 2030 and 6.3GW by 2035 within the state [3].
A BESS can participate in the Australian National Electric-
ity Market (NEM) and generates revenue through two streams,
as it can do in other market-based electricity systems. Firstly,
the BESS can help maintain system reliability by balancing the
mismatch between time-varying generation (with renewables)
and demand [4]. Such mismatches lead to price fluctuations in
the real-time wholesale spot market, creating economic incen-
tives for the BESS to participate in the spot market for energy
arbitrage, i.e., buy low and sell high. Secondly, the BESS can
provide grid services to enhance system security and stability
in the frequency control ancillary services (FCAS) market [5].
The provision of these system services was historically a
by-product of large synchronous generators in the market,
e.g., coal-fired power plants. With coal generators retiring
and exiting the market, VRE is growing fast as the main
source of supply. As a result, market operators are increasingly
compelled to intervene and seek system services from new
market participants, particularly from grid-scale BESS [6],
highlighting the crucial role of the BESS.
Given the multiple prospective revenue streams that the
BESS is exposed to, strategic participation in multiple markets
is essential to unlocking the full potential of the BESS in sup-
porting the transitioning grid while maximizing its economic
returns. For the BESS, such strategic participation demands the
optimal scheduling in spot and FCAS markets simultaneously,
commonly referred to as joint bidding. However, this presents
notable challenges arising from the highly volatile nature of
market prices (as the exogenous uncertainty) and coupling re-
source constraint (as the endogenous challenge due to limited
BESS capacity shared by multiple markets over time). Given
these complexities, the development of an effective framework
for joint bidding of the BESS across multiple markets is of
great value to both the BESS owners and the power system.
Previous research has examined joint bidding using
optimization-based approaches. The underlying real-time bid-
ding strategies are derived mostly through stochastic opti-
arXiv:2402.19110v1  [eess.SY]  29 Feb 2024

2
mization [7], [8], whose performance is highly dependent on
accurate energy price modeling and forecasting. Predicting
energy prices, however, is notoriously difficult since the spot
and FCAS markets are highly volatile [9], and the price drivers
are remarkably complex. Alternatively, deep reinforcement
learning (DRL)-based methods [10]–[16] have drawn increas-
ing attention lately for their data-driven characteristics and
interactive learning manner, enabling DRL to dynamically
learn the uncertainty of the electricity market without prior
knowledge of energy prices or price forecasts.
Existing studies have employed optimization and RL tech-
niques to develop BESS joint-bidding strategies, as discussed
in Section II. Our literature review highlights three research
gaps as follows: 1) previous studies tended to overlook
the hidden temporal information inside time-varying energy
prices. Better decisions could be made by analyzing useful
information from the inherent temporal changes of those price
signals; 2) “black-box” DRL methods lack transparency and
interpretability. It is often difficult to trace back how the
DRL models understand energy prices and lead to a particular
decision in their bidding decision-making mechanism. These
methods also cannot provide insights into the charge/discharge
behaviors of the BESS when following the proposed bidding
strategies, leaving the bidding outcomes less interpretable; 3)
joint bidding in multiple markets has not been adequately
investigated, particularly for contingency FCAS market. This
is noteworthy considering that contingency FCAS constitutes
a major revenue source for the BESS in the NEM [17].
To bridge above research gaps, we develop a novel
temporal-aware DRL-based bidding strategy for the BESS
taking part in the spot and contingency FCAS markets simulta-
neously. Our strategy draws on a transformer-based temporal
feature extractor (TTFE) to fully exploit the temporal price
spreads of multi-time-series energy prices in both markets
for learning a better joint bidding strategy. Specifically, this
“temporal-aware” capability could better assist the BESS in
scheduling charge/discharge for energy arbitrage in the spot
market, while concurrently bidding power for contingency
FCAS delivery to maximize the overall economic returns.
Despite the complexity of joint bidding, our proposed strategy
is more interpretable and can shed light on the temporal
bidding behaviors of the BESS. The main contributions of
our work are summarized as follows.
• BESS Joint-Market Participation: To meet the increasing
need for the provision of frequency services to stabilize
the grid, we deploy the BESS to participate in six
contingency FCAS sub-markets in addition to the revenue
stream through energy arbitrage in the spot market. The
facilitation of BESS in joint-market bidding, particularly
in the prospective FCAS market, takes advantage of the
markets’ flexibility and unlocks BESS’s economic poten-
tial. Our study provides a viable case for BESS’s revenue
creation in an increasingly complicated electricity market
with exogenous uncertainty in prices.
• Extracting Temporal Information of Energy Prices: Un-
like previous studies that overlooked the temporal trends
of historical energy prices, we develop a novel TTFE
with a stacked multi-head attention mechanism to exploit
historical multi-market energy prices, extract their under-
lying temporal information, and provide insights for the
BESS to be temporal-aware of and responsive to market
volatility for better bidding decisions.
• DRL-based Bidding Strategy: To address the uncertainty
of the real-time markets, we introduce an off-policy DRL
algorithm, namely soft actor-critic (SAC), to maximize
the overall revenue in the joint bidding problem, modeled
as a Markov decision process (MDP). Numerical results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in creat-
ing a significant performance boost and surpassing the
optimization-based benchmark by approximately 24%.
• Novel Interpretations on “Black-box DRL” Models : Our
study offers three novel model-based interpretations of
the internal decision-making mechanism of the DRL-
based joint bidding strategy. Specifically, the Q-value-
based, attention-based, and gradient-based interpretations
suggest that capturing historical price fluctuations plays a
crucial role in improving bidding performance. The inter-
pretability of our model provides human-understandable
insights, increasing trust of using such models in real-
world industries.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews the related work. Section III formulates the joint-
bidding problem of the BESS in the spot and contingency
FCAS markets. Section IV proposes our temporal-aware DRL-
based bidding strategy. Section V presents and discusses
simulation results. Section VI concludes this paper.
II. R ELATED WORK
Real-time bidding strategies for the BESS have been widely
studied using optimization-based methods. For instance, the
studies in [18]–[20] approached energy arbitrage as a linear
programming problem in the electricity markets of the U.S.,
Australia, and Europe, respectively. However, these works
relied on perfect knowledge of energy prices, which are not
available in practice. To address the uncertainty of energy
prices, researchers have proposed alternative approaches. Ab-
dulla et al. [7] proposed a stochastic dynamic programming
approach that used available forecasts to operate a BESS in the
wholesale spot market. Similarly, Krishnamurthy et al. [8] for-
mulated a stochastic optimization problem that employed price
scenario generation to forecast electricity prices. However,
both of these studies were dependent on accurate energy price
forecasting. Though He et al. [21] has designed a real-time
bidding strategy for the BESS, they focused on participating
in the local electricity market with a community-scale BESS
rather than the wholesale market for broader benefits. In addi-
tion, Chen et al. [22] proposed game-theoretical frameworks
to promote energy trading. However, these methods required
information from other market participants, making them less
applicable in real-world applications.
Recently, bidding strategies using DRL have gained popu-
larity due to their model-free and data-driven characteristics.
Several studies, e.g., in [10]–[12], [23], have proposed Q-
learning-based bidding strategies for energy arbitrage. These
studies utilized various techniques including Q-learning [10],

3
[23], double deep Q-learning [11], and multiple deep Q-
learning variants [12]. Specifically, the works by [10]–[12]
studied real-time bidding in the wholesale electricity mar-
ket with grid-scale BESSs, while Wang et al. [23] mainly
analyzed peer-to-peer energy trading with relatively small-
capacity BESSs. The algorithms employed in the above studies
discretized the bidding decision space, simplifying the problem
at the cost of performance to an extent. In contrast, other works
such as [13], [24] and [14] employed proximal policy opti-
mization (PPO) [13], [24] and SAC [14] algorithms to perform
energy arbitrage in the continuous decision space, respectively.
Specifically, Jeong et al. [24] combined renewable generators
with BESS in real-time market participation, while the BESS
only serves as an onsite backup source to supplement the
renewable generation. Moreover, Huang et al. [15] and Anwar
et al. [16] proposed PPO-based joint bidding strategies in the
spot and regulation FCAS markets. These approaches aimed to
offer a more nuanced approach to bidding in energy markets.
The literature review suggests that bidding in the contin-
gency FCAS market has received limited attention. To address
this research gap and evaluate the potential of joint-market
bidding, we present a new approach named “TempDRL”,
enabling the BESS to simultaneously participate in the spot
and contingency FCAS markets. Moreover, previous studies
tended to neglect the importance of historical price signals
and thus did not capture the price trends. While several studies
have explored capturing historical temporal information using
recurrent neural network structures in the field of robotics [ ?]
and chemical engineering [26], to the best of our knowledge,
extracting useful temporal price information from raw price
data has been seemingly less discussed. Therefore, to take
advantage of historical prices, our approach utilizes a TTFE
to effectively extract and use the temporal information from
multi-time-series energy prices in both the spot and contin-
gency FCAS markets. This information is then fed into the
SAC algorithm to learn a joint bidding strategy that maximizes
the overall revenue from both markets. A visual representation
of the TempDRL framework is presented in Fig. 1.
III. S YSTEM MODEL
In this study, we investigate the participation of a BESS
in the NEM as a price-taker, assuming its bids will not
affect the market-clearing outcomes, which is reasonable in
particular in wholesale markets with high trading volumes.
We maximize the potential of the BESS for revenue cre-
ation through simultaneous participation in both the spot and
contingency FCAS markets. The context of the joint bidding
strategy is presented in detail in Section III-A. Section III-B
outlines multiple revenue streams of the BESS under various
operational conditions. The joint bidding optimization problem
is formulated in Section III-C.
A. The Australian National Electricity Market
1) The Spot Market: As a major part of the NEM, the spot
market is a real-time market for trading wholesale electric-
ity between generators and loads, where power supply and
Fig. 1. The framework of the TempDRL.
demand are balanced instantaneously through a centrally co-
ordinated dispatch process managed by the Australian Energy
Market Operator (AEMO) [27]. Generators submit bids (price
and quantity) every five minutes. AEMO dispatches generators
in a least-cost manner by ranking generator bids from low to
high to form a bidding stack. The generator bids that fulfill the
last power demand in the bidding stack determine the market
clearing price, known as the spot price. Generators that bid
below or at that price will get dispatched at their offer quantity
and get paid at the spot price. The spot price is constantly
subject to fluctuations based on the electricity supply-demand
mismatch and can increase in response to generation shortages
and decrease with redundant generation.
2) The Contingency FCAS Market: In the NEM, the FCAS
market is established to ensure stable system frequency by
procuring reserves in response to increasing penetration of
VRE resources [5]. The grid-scale BESS can provide two main
types of ancillary services: regulation FCAS and contingency
FCAS. In this study, we focus on the joint bidding of the BESS
in the spot and contingency FCAS markets.
Contingency events, such as power plant failures and trans-
mission network faults, can result in system frequency de-
viation from the normal operating band (NOB) from 49.95
to 50.15Hz. To restore system frequency in these situations,
the contingency FCAS market has been established to provide
a larger amount of energy for a longer period of time than
regulation services [5]. This market is divided into six sub-
markets, including fast raise (FR), fast lower (FL), slow raise
(SR), slow lower (SL), delayed raise (DR), and delayed lower
(DL), each requiring different response times of 6 seconds, 60
seconds, or 5-minutes for fast, slow, and delayed sub-markets,
respectively. For example, the BESS may bid to discharge in
the FR sub-market to arrest a rapid frequency drop within 6
seconds, or in the SR sub-market to stabilize frequency after
a major drop within 60 seconds, or in the DR sub-market to
recover frequency back to the NOB within 5 minutes.
B. BESS Multi-Market Revenue Streams
Energy arbitrage in the spot market and network service
provision in the FCAS market are two major revenue streams
for the BESS.
1) Spot Market: Real-time power supply-demand mis-
matches are reflected by price fluctuations in the spot market,
creating economic incentives for the BESS to perform energy
arbitrage (i.e., buy low and sell high) in the spot market. Given
that the BESS cannot simultaneously charge and discharge, we

4
introduce two binary variables vch
t and vdch
t to restrict the BESS
operation, which can be formulated as
vch
t + vdch
t ≤ 1, v ch
t , vdch
t ∈ {0, 1} , (1)
where the BESS sits idle when these two variables are zero.
We denote the BESS’s bid power in the spot market as pS
t
and let ρS
t be the spot price, ∆t be the duration of the NEM
dispatch interval (i.e., 5 minutes), T be the total time slots in
the operational horizon, and ηch, ηdch be charging/discharging
efficiencies of the BESS. The revenue from the spot market
can be formulated as
RS = ∆t
TX
t=1

vdch
t ηdch − vch
t
1
ηch

ρS
t pS
t . (2)
2) Contingency FCAS Market: In addition to energy arbi-
trage in the spot market, the BESS can deliver contingency
frequency services in the six contingency FCAS sub-markets,
categorized into raise and lower components across a fast
(6 second), slow (60 second), and delayed (5 minute) time
frames. According to the associated market rules [5], market
participants that bid in the contingency FCAS market get
dispatched by the AEMO only in the event of a contingency.
Reserved power for service delivery cannot be adopted for
other usages, even though the contingency event does not
occur. We denote the market clearing prices of the six contin-
gency FCAS sub-markets as ρFR
t , ρFL
t , ρSR
t , ρSL
t , ρDR
t , and ρDL
t
for fast raise, fast lower, slow raise, slow lower, delayed raise,
and delayed lower services, respectively [28]. The BESS’s
bid power in the fast, slow, and delayed sub-markets are
defined as pfast
t , pslow
t , and pdelay
t , respectively. Revenue from
the contingency FCAS market is formulated as
RFCAS = ∆t
TX
t=1
h
vdch
t ηdch

ρFR
t pfast
t + ρSR
t pslow
t + ρDR
t pdelay
t

+vch
t
1
ηch

ρFL
t pfast
t + ρSL
t pslow
t + ρDL
t pdelay
t

. (3)
Note that when the BESS chooses to discharge, i.e., vdch
t =
1, the BESS, besides arbitrage in the spot market, is able to
deliver frequency-raise services in the FR, SR, and DR sub-
markets but cannot provide services that involve charging. On
the contrary, the BESS can provide frequency-lower services
in the FL, SL, and DL sub-markets when the charging binary
variable equals 1.
C. Joint-Market Bidding Formulation
Considering the multiple revenue streams of the BESS from
the spot and contingency FCAS markets, we formulate the
BESS joint bidding as an optimization problem, illustrated in
Fig. 2. The optimization objective is to maximize the total
revenue deducted by BESS degradation cost as
max RS+RFCAS −c∆t
TX
t=1
vdch
t (pS
t +pfast
t +pslow
t +pdelay
t ), (4)
where the last term represents the degradation cost of the
BESS. We model the degradation using discharge as it approx-
imates the cycle [16], and c is a cost coefficient in AU$/MWh.
Real-time dispatch of the BESS is constrained by its rated
power formulated as
0 ≤ pfast
t ≤ P FCAS
max , (5)
0 ≤ pslow
t ≤ P FCAS
max , (6)
0 ≤ pdelay
t ≤ P FCAS
max , (7)
0 ≤ pS
t + pfast
t + pslow
t + pdelay
t ≤ Pmax, (8)
where Pmax is the rated power (in MW) of the BESS and
P FCAS
max is the maximum ancillary service power of the BESS
(in MW) that is related to frequency deviation, frequency
controller dead band, and the droop of the BESS [29]. The
minimum allowable droop setting of any BESS with a name-
plate rating of 5 MW or above is 1.7% in the NEM. Eq. (5)
to (7) show that the bid power in the fast, slow, and delayed
FCAS sub-markets must be within the maximum ancillary
service power. Furthermore, Eq. (8) represents that the sum of
bid power in the spot and contingency FCAS markets cannot
exceed the rated power of the BESS.
Also, charge and discharge operations of the BESS are also
constrained by its current capacity et−1 + ∆et, where et−1 is
its capacity after the previous dispatch interval and ∆et is the
energy change in the current dispatch interval. The BESS’s
capacity must be within its lower and upper energy limits
denoted by Emin and Emax, which can be formulated as
Emin ≤ et−1 + ∆et ≤ Emax. (9)
Both power exchange in the spot market and frequency service
delivery in the contingency FCAS market lead to changes in
stored energy of the BESS. The energy change caused by spot
market particiation can be formulated as
∆eS
t = ∆t
 
vch
t − vdch
t

pS
t . (10)
For contingency FCAS services, we introduce two con-
tingency indicators Iraise
t and Ilower
t to represent the demand.
Specifically, the raise/lower indicators are set to 1 only on the
occurrence of a major drop/raise of system frequency caused
by a contingency event. The energy change from delivering
frequency services can be formulated as
∆eFCAS
t =
 
vch
t − vdch
t
 
Iraise
t + Ilower
t

×

∆tfastpfast
t + ∆tslowpslow
t + ∆tdelaypdelay
t

, (11)
where ∆tfast, ∆tslow, ∆tdelay are the actual dispatch duration
of the fast, slow, and delayed sub-markets. The summation
of indicators in Eq. (11), i.e., Iraise
t + Ilower
t , represents the
occurrence of a contingency event, while the last term rep-
resents the total energy output of three kinds of contingency
FCAS services in one 5-minute NEM dispatch interval. Com-
bining energy changes from the spot and contingency FCAS
markets, the total energy change ∆et can be expressed as
∆et = ∆eS
t + ∆eFCAS
t .
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
To solve the joint bidding problem, we first develop
the transformer-based temporal feature extractor, namely the
TTFE, in Section IV-A to extract temporal information of

5
Fig. 2. The system model paradigm.
multi-time-series energy prices in the spot and contingency
FCAS markets, followed by Section IV-B, where we model
the real-time bidding problem as an MDP and then develop the
SAC [30] algorithm to learn an optimal joint-bidding strategy
to maximize the overall revenue.
A. Transformer-based Temporal Feature Extractor
We define a price vector consisting of market clearing prices
in the spot and contingency FCAS markets as
ρt =

ρS
t , ρFR
t , ρFL
t , ρSR
t , ρSL
t , ρDR
t , ρDL
t

. (12)
A temporal segment of length L is further developed to store
a series of historical price vectors, which can be defined as
St = [ρt−L+1, ρt−L+2, · · · , ρt] ∈ RL×F , (13)
where F is the feature dimension of the temporal segment,
representing the number of participated markets.
To take advantage of historically multi-time-series energy
prices, inspired by the transformer [31] for its powerful capa-
bility in sequential feature extraction, we develop the TTFE to
capture the temporal patterns of the temporal segment. Specif-
ically, the proposed TTFE explores mutual influences of each
price vector pair in the temporal segment context and assigns
greater attention to price vectors with higher influence values
(namely attention weights [31]). Such ”attention” information
will be passed to the SAC algorithm (to be introduced in
Section IV-B2), thus enabling the BESS to be temporal-aware
of volatile energy prices for better bidding decisions.
The developed TTFE framework is illustrated in Fig. 3,
including three key components: feature embedding, stacked
multi-head attention (MHA), and feature aggregation. For each
bidding decision making, we construct a temporal segment
defined in Eq. (13), feed it into the TTFE, and derive an
extracted feature vector to assist the SAC algorithm to bid
in the spot and contingency FCAS markets.
1) Feature Embedding: Before fed into the stacked MHA,
the input temporal segment first passes through the feature em-
bedding element for linear transformation (LT) in the feature
space, which can be formulated as
S′ = LT(S) = SW embed + bembed ∈ RL×F ′
, (14)
where W embed and bembed are the weighted and bias matrices
of the LT layer, respectively. The transformed feature space
dimension is denoted by F ′.
Fig. 3. The framework of TTFE.
Fig. 4. The internal structure of one MHA.
2) Stacked MHA: The stacked MHA is the most critical
component of our TTFE and plays a significant role in analyz-
ing the temporal importance of historical prices. The internal
structure of one MHA is illustrated in Fig. 4. We denote the
input of the ith MHA by SMHA
i−1 , where i = 1 , · · · , NMHA is
the index of the MHA and NMHA is the number of MHAs in
the stacked MHA. In particular, the input of the first MHA
SMHA
0 is the transformed temporal segment S′.
Here, we present the detailed temporal feature extraction
process of the first MHA. To better explore temporal features
of the transformed segment S′, the MHA splits the transformed
feature space into multiple sub-spaces (namely the heads of
the MHA), aiming to learn various lower-scale feature maps as
opposed to one all-encompassing map. The feature sub-space
dimension of each MHA head is defined as F ′
h , where h is
the number of MHA heads.
The transformed segment S′ passes through each MHA
head three times in a parallel manner as shown in Fig. 4
to create the query, key, and value matrices denoted by Q,
K, and V , respectively. We formulate the simultaneous linear
projection process as
Qj = LTj (S′) = S′W Q
j ∈ RL× F ′
h , (15)
Kj = LTj (S′) = S′W K
j ∈ RL× F ′
h , (16)
Vj = LTj (S′) = S′W V
j ∈ RL× F ′
h , (17)
where j is the index of the MHA head and W Q
j , W K
j , W V
j
are weighted matrices.

6
The essence of the MHA is its self-attention (SA) mecha-
nism whose structure is illustrated in detail on the right side of
Fig. 4. The SA calculates the aforementioned attention weights
of each price vector pair, indicating the temporal significance
of each price vector. We define one SA head as
SSA
j = SAj(Q, K, V )
= W att
j Vj = softmax
 
QjK T
j√
F ′
!
Vj ∈ RL× F ′
h , (18)
where the softmax (·) function is used for normalization. The
result of the softmax operation is referred to as the attention
matrix of the jth SA head denoted by W att
j ∈ RL×L, whose
element watt
m,n, i.e., the attention weight, represents the relative
significance of how the price vector ρt−L+n affects ρt−L+m
in the original temporal segment St. With the attention matrix,
the MHA can pay greater attention to price vectors with larger
attention weights. Moreover, the multiplication operation of
W att
j Vj in Eq. (18) aims to aggregate such “attention” infor-
mation into the original temporal segment St, since the value
matrix Vj is obtained after several linear projections of St and
inherently saves its partial information.
To fuse the extracted temporal feature information in each
MHA head, we then concatenate the outputs of each SA head
and process it through one more LT layer as shown in Fig. 4,
which can be formulated as
MHAi (Q, K, V ) = LT
 
Concat
 
SSA
1 , · · · , SSA
h

. (19)
The above LT output accumulates the initial input of the
MHA (i.e., SMHA
i−1 ) and passes through a LayerNorm layer for
normalization. Subsequently, we use the same Forward Net
structure in the original transformer model [31], i.e., two LT
layers with the rectified linear unit (ReLU) as the activation
function, to derive the final output of the MHA, which can be
formulated as
SMHA
i = ForwardNet (MHAi (Q, K, V )) ∈ RL×F ′
. (20)
3) Feature Aggregation: It is challenging to integrate the
stacked MHA output (i.e., SMHA
NMHA) into the DRL algorithm,
due to its two-dimensional attribute and the considerably large
amount of parameters involved. To address this, we introduce
the one-dimensional global average pooling [32] to compress
the output of the stacked MHA, referred to as the Feature
Aggregation element in our TTFE. Such a pooling technique
performs downsampling along the temporal dimension L.
The final extracted feature vector of our proposed TTFE is
formulated as
f = [f1, · · · , fn, · · · , fF ′] ∈ R1×F ′
, (21)
with its element fn calculated via the global average pooling
as fn = 1
L
PL
m=1 sm,n, where sm,n is the element of the
stacked MHA’s outputSMHA
NMHA. The extracted feature vector car-
ries temporal information of multi-time-series energy prices,
sequentially fed to the following SAC algorithm for making
better bidding decisions.
B. Learning Optimal Joint-Bidding Strategy via DRL
1) MDP Modeling: We model the consecutive BESS bid-
ding problem as an MDP, consisting of four parts: state space
S, action space A, probability space P, and reward space R.
State Space S: The BESS’s state aggregates the available
price vector defined in Eq. (12) and the extracted temporal
feature vector derived in Eq. (21), along with the BESS state
of charge (SoC), which can be expressed as
st = [SoCt−1, ρt−1, ft−1] , (22)
in which the SoC is defined as SoC t−1 = et−1
E , where E is
the storage capacity of the BESS.
Action Space A: Actions of the BESS include
charge/discharge variables vch
t , vdch
t and bids in the spot
and contingency FCAS markets, which are scaled by Pmax.
Thus, action in the spot market aS
t falls into the range from
0 to 1, while actions in the fast, slow, and delayed FCAS
sub-markets afast
t , aslow
t , and adelay
t are from 0 to P FCAS
max
Pmax
. Actions
of the BESS are defined as
at =
h
vdch
t , vch
t , aS
t , afast
t , aslow
t , adelay
t
i
. (23)
Probability Space P: The probability space refers to the
probability set of transitioning to the next state after taking a
deterministic action, which is defined as P (st+1|st, at).
Reward Space R: The BESS receives a reward after taking
action at at state st, which reflects the effectiveness of
the bidding decision. Thus, designing an appropriate reward
function is of great importance to facilitate the BESS to make
better bidding decisions.
For the spot market, we introduce two charge/discharge
indicators denoted by Ich
t and Idch
t , formulated as
Ich
t = sgn
 
¯ρS
t − ρS
t

, Idch
t = sgn
 
ρS
t − ¯ρS
t

, (24)
where sgn (·) is the sign function and ¯ρt is the exponential
moving average of the spot price [10], which is defined as
¯ρS
t = τ S ¯ρS
t−1 + (1 − τ S)ρS
t , (25)
where τ S ∈ (0, 1) is a smoothing parameter. The charge
and discharge indicators incentivize the BESS to buy low
(ρS
t < ¯ρS
t ) and sell high ( ρS
t > ¯ρS
t ). Any bids violating such an
arbitrage guideline will be penalized. Hence, the spot market
rewards are formulated as
rS
t = aS
t ρS
t

vdch
t ηdch − vch
t
1
ηch

+ βSaS
t |ρS
t − ¯ρS
t |

Idch
t vdch
t ηdch + Ich
t vch
t
1
ηch

,
(26)
where the first term represents the inherent revenue gain/loss
caused by the power exchange in the spot market. The second
term is the reward for performing energy arbitrage based on the
buy-low-sell-high guideline, with the coefficient βS indicating
its importance.
Moreover, rewards from the fast (FR and FL), slow (SR
and SL), and delayed (DR and DL) contingency FCAS sub-
markets can be expressed as

7
rfast
t = afast
t

vdch
t ηdchρFR
t + vch
t
1
ηch ρFL
t

, (27)
rslow
t = aslow
t

vdch
t ηdchρSR
t + vch
t
1
ηch ρSL
t

, (28)
rdelay
t = adelay
t

vdch
t ηdchρDR
t + vch
t
1
ηch ρDL
t

. (29)
Combining all the rewards from the spot and contingency
FCAS markets, we obtain the reward function of the BESS as
rt = rS
t + rfast
t + rslow
t + rdelay
t . (30)
Additionally, a constant penalty, e.g., 50 used in our algo-
rithm, is added to the reward rt when the BESS’s bid violates
its energy limits. Such a penalty often comes along with the
termination of the training episode, informing the RL agent
not to violate environment constraints for the aim of reward
maximization. Given that the constant penalty cannot perfectly
avoid constraint violation, we have also clipped the BESS’s
bidding decisions within its battery SoC limits, preventing the
BESS from violating both its physical constraints and market
rules.
2) Optimizing MDP by SAC: We employ a state-of-the-art
DRL algorithm, namely SAC [30], to optimize the derived
MDP. SAC aims to learn an optimal bidding strategy denoted
by π(at|st) that maximizes the expected returns over the total
time frame, which can be formulated as
Jπ = Est∼P,at∼π(st)
" TX
t=1
γt−1rt
#
, (31)
where γ is the discounted factor.
SAC follows an actor-critic framework, where the actor,
i.e., the bidding strategy π, determines an action based on
the current state, and the critic consists of two functions: the
value function V (st) and the Q function Q(st, at), which
can examine the effectiveness of the state-action pair. The Q
function can be formulated using the Bellman equation as
Q(st, at) = rt + γEst+1∼P [V (st+1)] , (32)
with the value function defined as
V (st) = Eat∼π(st) [Q(st, at)] . (33)
The essence of the SAC is to introduce an entropy term
for the bidding strategy, which can improve its stochasticity
and better explore the underlying bidding decision space. The
entropy term is defined as
H [π] = −Est∼P,at∼π(st) [log π (at|st)] . (34)
Entropy is originally defined as a measure of information
content given a distribution. In the context of the adopted
SAC algorithm, the entropy term describes the diversity of
the output actions, ensuring diversification of the action policy,
i.e., increasing the information content of the action distribu-
tion, thereby preventing the policy from becoming stuck in
local minima. Though the entropy term introduces aleatoric
uncertainty in the DRL-based bidding strategy [33], it enables
the action policy to strike a more effective balance between
reward and entropy maximization, thereby approximating the
global optimum.
With the addition of entropy, the objective of the bidding
strategy and value function can be rewritten as
Jπ = Est∼P,at∼π(st)
" TX
t=1
γt−1rt + αH [π]
#
, (35)
V (st) = Eat∼π(st) [Q(st, at) − α log π(at|st)] , (36)
where α is the temperature parameter representing the relative
significance of the entropy against the returns.
We can find a better bidding strategy in SAC based on
πnew = arg min
π′
DKL

π′(st) || exp [Q (st, π (st))]
Z(st)

, (37)
where the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence D KL measures
the distribution distance between the update strategy candidate
π′ and the exponential Q function normalized by its parti-
tion function Z(st). The partition function normalizes the Q
function by enumerating all input states in the state space S,
which does not affect the gradient to the new policy and can
be ignored during the training process of the action policy.
We apply neural networks as function approximators to
estimate the bidding strategy πϕ(at|st), the value function
Vψ(st), and the Q function Qθ(st, at), where ϕ, ψ, θ are their
corresponding neural network parameters. The Adam gradient
descent optimizer [30] is used to train these neural networks.
Update πϕ: The bidding strategy is updated by minimizing
the aforementioned KL divergence, whose gradient can be
formulated as
∇ϕJπ(ϕ) = ∇ϕEst∼B

DKL

πϕ || exp [Qθ (st, πϕ)]
Zθ(st)

, (38)
where the replay buffer B is introduced to store transitions
defined as {st, at, rt, st+1} in the MDP. To ensure that the
sum of bid power does not exceed the rated power of the BESS
as defined in Eq. (8), we develop an ancillary loss function
for the bidding strategy objective, which can be formulated as
Lπ(ϕ) = abid
t I
 
abid
t > 1

, (39)
with the sum of bids abid
t defined as
abid
t = aS
t + afast
t + aslow
t + adelay
t . (40)
Hence, the gradient of the bidding strategy in Eq. (38) can be
rewritten as
∇ϕJπ(ϕ) ← ∇ ϕJπ(ϕ) + βL∇ϕEat∼B [Lπ(ϕ)] , (41)
where βL is the coefficient of the proposed loss function.
Update Vψ: We update the value network by minimizing
the squared residual error of Eq. (36). The gradient of the
value network objective is formulated as
∇ψJV (ψ) = ∇ψEst∈B
1
2
h
Vψ(st) − ˆV (st)
i2
, (42)
with the estimated value function ˆV (st) expressed as
ˆV (st) = Eat∼πϕ(st) [Qθ(st, at) − α log πϕ(at|st)] . (43)
Update Qθ: Similarly, the Q network is optimized by
minimizing the residual error of the Bellman equation defined
in Eq. (32). To stabilize the optimization process, a target value

8
Algorithm 1 The TempDRL Bidding Strategy
Initialize parameters of the TTFE and SAC.
for t = 1, · · · , T do
Construct and feed the temporal segment St−1 into the
TTFE; Derive the extracted feature vector ft−1.
Get the current state st = [SoCt−1, ρt−1, ft−1]
Get action at = πϕ(st) and reward rt.
if action violates the BESS energy limits then
at ← 0.
end if
Transit into the next state st+1 via P (st+1|st, at).
Store transition {st, at, rt, st+1} into replay buffer B.
Update parameters with sufficient transitions.
end for
TABLE I
THE INITIALIZED PARAMETERS .
ηch, ηdch 0.95 ∆t 5 mins Pmax 2 MW
P FCAS
max 1 MW E 10 MWh Emin 0.5 MWh
Emax 9.5 MWh ∆tfast 6 secs ∆tslow 55 secs
∆tdelay 4 mins L 32 F 7
h 8 F ′ 64 NMHA 2
τ S 0.9 βS 10 γ 0.99
βL 10 τ ψ 0.01 c AU$1/MWh
ηπ 0.0003 ηV 0.0003 ηQ 0.0003
network V ˆψ is adopted to estimate the Q function, i.e., the
right-hand side of Eq. (32). The gradient of the Q network
objective is formulated as
∇θJQ(θ) = ∇θEst∼B
1
2
h
Qθ (st, πϕ) − ˆQ(st, πϕ)
i2
, (44)
with the estimated Q function ˆQ(st, πϕ) expressed as
ˆQ(st, πϕ) = rt + γEst+1∈P
h
V ˆψ(st+1)
i
. (45)
Making use of the value network parameters ψ, we update
the target value network in an exponential moving average
manner, formulated as
ˆψ ← τ ψψ + (1 − τ ψ) ˆψ, (46)
where τ ψ ∈ (0, 1) is the smoothing parameter.
The detailed algorithmic procedure of our TempDRL is
presented in Algorithm 1.
In summary, the gradient descent processes for the bidding
strategy, value network, and Q network are formulated as
ϕ ← ϕ − ηπ∇ϕJπ(ϕ), (47)
ψ ← ψ − ηV ∇V JV (ψ), (48)
θ ← θ − ηQ∇QJQ(θ), (49)
where ηπ, ηV , ηQ are corresponding learning rates. As the
TTFE is integrated into the SAC algorithm and shared by the
bidding strategy πϕ, the Q network Qθ, and the value network
Vψ, the TTFE is simultaneously updated during the gradient
descent process.
V. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Experimental Settings
Our proposed TempDRL method is trained and evalu-
ated using energy prices from the five jurisdictions of the
NEM in 2016, including Victoria (VIC), New South Wales
(NSW), Queensland (QLD), South Australia (SA), and Tas-
mania (TAS). The energy prices from the first ten months are
utilized for training while the last two months are reserved
for evaluation. The length of one training episode is one day,
consisting of 288 time frames, given that the NEM dispatch
interval is five minutes. The training of the DRL algorithms is
carried out using an Nvidia TITAN RTX graphics processing
unit. The initialized parameters of the TempDRL are provided
in Table I. Moreover, the dimensionality of LT layers in the
TTFE (except the first LT layer in the Forward Net) is 64,
while the dimensionality of the first LT layer in the Forward
Net is set as 2048. The MLP parts of the policy, Q, and value
neural networks all have two hidden layers (i.e., two LT layers)
with a dimensionality of 512 for each layer. The activation
function used in the SAC algorithm is the ReLU function.
Notably, the outputs of the MLP are finally processed by one
more hyperbolic tangent activation function to constrain the
output range into [−1, 1].
For the battery’s parameters, the charging/discharging effi-
ciencies, i.e., ηch and ηdch, are both 0.95. The BESS’s storage
capacity is 10 MWh, with the rated power and maximum
ancillary service power set as 2 MW and 1 MW, respectively.
The minimum and maximum energy limits of the BESS are
set as 0.5 MWh and 9.5 MWh, respectively, equivalent to 5%
and 95% SoC limits.
Three scenarios are analyzed in which the BESS partic-
ipates: 1) the spot market only; 2) the contingency FCAS
market only; and 3) both markets jointly.
B. Benchmark Comparisons
1) Evaluation Revenue Comparisons: To assess the efficacy
of the proposed TTFE, we train and evaluate our TempDRL
model with and without TTFE. Additionally, we establish a
predict-and-optimize (P&O) benchmark, i.e., a deterministic
model predictive control (DMPC)-based approach [34], for
comparison purposes. The P&O method involves forecasting
market clearing prices via a long short-term memory (LSTM)
network and solving the joint bidding problem through mixed
integer linear programming, which is implemented via the
PuLP library [35] and solved by the built-in Gurobi solver.
The look-ahead period for the LSTM model is set as 48, i.e.,
predicting energy prices in the next 48 dispatch intervals. For
fair comparisons, we also incorporate the transformer model
into the P&O framework. Specifically, the extracted feature
vector (defined in (21)) is directly fed into an LT layer for
forecasting. We refer to the P&O benchmark with the LSTM
and the transformer model as LP&O and TP&O, respectively.
Moreover, the DRL-based bidding strategy without the TTFE
(i.e., only with MLPs) is referred to as MLP-DRL.
The results based on the revenue derived in VIC and the
other four states (including NSW, QLD, SA, and TAS) are
presented in Fig. 5 and Fig. 15 (in Appendix A), respectively.

9
TABLE II
THE EVALUATION REVENUE OF THE TEMP DRL AND BENCHMARKS IN FIVE JURISDICTIONS OF THE NEM (U NIT: AU$).
State Market Evaluation Revenue Revenue Boosts of TempDRL
MLP-DRL LP&O TP&O TempDRL MLP-DRL LP&O TP&O
VIC
Spot 19, 435 24, 547 25, 326 30, 467 57% 24% 20%
FCAS 7, 840 7, 824 8, 296 9, 623 23% 23% 16%
Joint 22, 975 29, 049 30, 320 35, 686 55% 23% 18%
NSW
Spot 14, 817 17, 297 18, 341 22, 853 54% 32% 25%
FCAS 8, 065 7, 983 7, 338 10, 143 26% 27% 38%
Joint 18, 052 19, 564 19, 682 25, 948 44% 33% 32%
QLD
Spot 28, 532 33, 873 32, 877 40, 625 42% 20% 24%
FCAS 6, 420 7, 704 7, 848 10, 583 65% 37% 35%
Joint 31, 052 38, 381 39, 640 46, 703 50% 22% 18%
SA
Spot 36, 334 37, 200 32, 892 44, 483 22% 20% 35%
FCAS 10, 186 10, 953 10, 330 13, 456 32% 23% 30%
Joint 40, 920 41, 413 41, 165 49, 146 20% 19% 19%
TAS
Spot 30, 812 33, 532 32, 240 41, 032 33% 22% 27%
FCAS 26, 951 22, 618 23, 468 31, 877 18% 41% 36%
Joint 45, 805 43, 287 44, 558 52, 478 15% 21% 18%
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-MLPDRL
FCAS-MLPDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-MLPDRL
(a) VIC – MLP-DRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-T empDRL
FCAS-T empDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-T empDRL (b) VIC – TempDRL
Fig. 5. Revenue comparisons of the TempDRL method with benchmarks in
spot, contingency FCAS, and joint markets of VIC.
VIC NSW QLD SA TAS0
1
2
3
4
5
6Revenue (AU$)
1e4
-32.0%
-32.0%
-37.0%
-37.0%
-32.0%
T empDRL
PIO
(a) Spot.
VIC NSW QLD SA TAS0
1
2
3
4Revenue (AU$)
1e4
-16.0% -16.0% -28.0%
-28.0%
-31.0%
T empDRL
PIO (b) Contingency FCAS.
Fig. 6. Revenue comparisons of the TempDRL and the PIO in spot and
contingency FCAS markets at five jurisdictions of the NEM.
The detailed results, including revenue boosts compared to
the three benchmarks, for all five jurisdictions in the NEM
are provided in Table II.
The results of our analysis, as depicted in Fig. 5a and 5b,
indicate that joint bidding consistently leads to higher revenue
compared to participating in individual markets in VIC, so as
other four jurisdictions, as shown in Table II. This revenue
increase can be attributed to BESS’s capability to fully utilize
its potential and capitalize on the flexibility offered by both
the spot and contingency FCAS markets.
More importantly, the results demonstrate that introducing
the TTFE can substantially improve bidding performance in
all three bidding scenarios, as shown in Table II. What stands
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
One-Month
Three-Month
Six-Month
T en-Month
(a) Spot.
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2Revenue (AU$)
1e4
One-Month
Three-Month
Six-Month
T en-Month (b) Contingency FCAS.
Fig. 7. Revenue comparisons of the TempDRL trained with different sizes
of dataset in the spot and contingency FCAS market of VIC.
out in both Table II and Fig. 5 is the significant revenue
boost after introducing the TTFE in the joint market, i.e., our
TempDRL approach shown in the purple solid line in Fig. 5b.
This considerable improvement has surpassed both the LP&O
and the TP&O benchmarks (shown in the green dotted and
red dash-dot lines, respectively) by approximately 23% and
18% in VIC, equivalent to AU$ 6, 638 and AU$5, 366 in total,
respectively.
More importantly, the results demonstrate that introducing
the TTFE can substantially improve bidding performance in
all three bidding scenarios, as shown in Table II. What stands
out in both Table II and Fig. 5 is the significant revenue
boost after introducing the TTFE in the joint market, i.e., our
TempDRL approach shown in the purple solid line in Fig. 5b.
This considerable improvement has surpassed both the LP&O
and the TP&O benchmarks (shown in the green dotted and
red dash-dot lines, respectively) by approximately 23% and
18% in VIC, equivalent to AU$ 6, 638 and AU$5, 366 in total,
respectively.
Also, it is noteworthy that, though the transformer model is
more advanced than the LSTM model in time-series forecast-
ing, its simulation results do not show significant superiority in
better financial performance compared to the LP&O method.
The bidding outcomes of the LP&O method even surpass that
of the TP&O method under multiple scenarios as shown in
Table II, e.g., the contingency FCAS market of NSW. The

10
results may suggest that even accurate forecast results may
lead to poor decision-making, which is consistent with findings
in recent research. The works by [36] and [37] attributed
it to the uncoupled forecast model and optimization solver
under the P&O optimization framework. The former (i.e., the
forecast model) is trained to improve the prediction accuracy
rather than optimize the bidding decisions, making the forecast
quality and the decision optimality decoupled, leading to likely
unsatisfactory performance.
In addition, to evaluate the absolute performance of our
TempDRL, we also implement an optimization benchmark
with perfect future information on energy prices in the eval-
uation dataset (i.e., two months of prices). This benchmark
is referred to as the perfect information optimization (PIO).
Revenue comparisons of the TempDRL and the PIO method
in the spot and contingency FCAS markets at five jurisdictions
of the NEM are depicted in Fig. 6, where the absolute bidding
performance differences are also annotated in the percentage
form. The absolute performance in the joint market scenario
is shown in Fig. 16 in Appendix B. The results reveal that
our proposed TempDRL method achieves remarkable bidding
outcomes compared to the PIO method with full knowledge of
energy prices during the operational horizon of evaluation. In
particular, the BESS’s performance in the contingency FCAS
markets of VIC and NSW nearly approximates the PIO method
with gaps of only 16%. Moreover, as future information is
unforeseeable in the electricity market, our proposed approach
is more viable, practical, and applicable for the BESS’s real-
time bidding, which has better capability to mitigate market
uncertainty and make profitable arbitrage decisions, compared
to benchmarks, including the LP&O, TP&O, and MLP-DRL.
Furthermore, the TempDRL’s performance with various
sizes of the training dataset is also examined. Here, we re-train
our TempDRL strategy using the one-month, three-month, and
six-month training dataset, with evaluation revenues in the spot
and contingency FCAS markets of the VIC in Fig. 7. The result
of the joint-market bidding is presented in Fig. 17 in Appendix
C. Such bidding outcomes suggest that an adequate amount of
training data is essential to train a well-performed DRL-based
bidding strategy, since its bidding performance is significantly
improved with more available training data.
2) Running Time Comparisons: We evaluate the running
time costs of the LP&O and the TP&O benchmarks, along
with DRL-based methods, to examine their viability in real-
time bidding. The results are shown in Table III. Specifically,
we divide the algorithms’ running time into the training
and evaluation stages. The training stage includes model
training time for the price predictors (in LP&O and TP&O
benchmarks) and DRL-based strategies (i.e., MLP-DRL and
TempDRL). The evaluation stage calculates the time costs of
real-time bidding decisions in the two-month-length evaluation
dataset. As shown in Table III, despite the longer training
time of both the MLP-DRL and the TempDRL, our DRL-
based bidding strategies can make significantly faster bidding
decisions in the evaluation stage, i.e., 40 seconds in total for
two-month bidding. In this regard, benefiting from massive
historical energy price data, a well-trained TempDRL strategy
is better suited to real-time online bidding, where accurate
TABLE III
RUNNING TIME OF OUR TEMP DRL WITH /WITHOUT THE TTFE, THE
LP&O BENCHMARK , AND THE TP&O BENCHMARK IN THE
JOINT -MARKET BIDDING .
Method Training Time Evaluation Time Total Time Cost
LP&O 3.8 mins 42.7 mins 46.5 mins
TP&O 5.2 mins 43.9 mins 49.1 mins
MLP-DRL 68.2 mins 0.5 mins 68.5 mins
TempDRL 80.7 mins 0.7 mins 80.5 mins
0 25 50 75 100
Bid Amount (MWh)
[0,10)
[10,20)
[20,30)
[30,40)
[40,50)
[50,60)
[60,70)
[70,80)
[80,90)
[90,100)
>100
Price Spread
With TTFE
Without TTFE
(a) Charge.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Bid Amount (MWh)
[0,10)
[10,20)
[20,30)
[30,40)
[40,50)
[50,60)
[60,70)
[70,80)
[80,90)
[90,100)
>100
Price Spread
With TTFE
Without TTFE (b) Discharge.
Fig. 8. Bid amounts for arbitrage under different price spreads.
1
0
1
Bid
Without TTFE With TTFE
180 185 190 195 200 205
Time Frame
10
20
30Spot Price
Fig. 9. Energy arbitrage at below-average spot prices. Negative/positive values
in the “Bid” axis indicate discharge/charge bids.
and rapid decision-making is in particular crucial. Though
training a DRL-based bidding strategy with feature extraction
takes approximately 12 more minutes, there is not a significant
difference in the time consumed for bidding using MLP-DRL
and TempDRL (with TTFE) during evaluation, spending 0.5
and 0.7 minutes, respectively.
C. BESS Bidding Behavior Analysis
To evaluate the bidding behavior of our proposed TempDRL
in response to stochastic price signals, we conduct the analysis
of the bidding decisions generated by the BESS in both
individual and joint markets.
1) Spot Market: In the spot market, the BESS aims to take
advantage of price spreads for energy arbitrage, i.e., buy low
and sell high. In Fig. 8, we illustrate the BESS’s arbitrage
behaviors via its bid amount (in MWh) under different price
spreads when conducting arbitrage operations (in which charg-
ing and discharging decisions are shown in Fig. 8a and 8b,
respectively). The results reveal that the DRL-based strategies
with/without the TTFE perform similarly when there are
significantly large price fluctuations, e.g., the price spread is
larger than AU$40/MWh under both charging and discharging
scenarios. However, our TTFE-embedded strategy presents

11
TABLE IV
THE EVALUATION RESULTS OF THE CONTINGENCY FCAS MARKET .
Sub
Market
Average
Price
Contingency
Response Times Bid Power (MW)
No TTFE TTFE No TTFE TTFE
FR AU$5.44
236/341 302/341
6482 9100
SR AU$3.25 6692 4094
DR AU$2.93 1625 7576
FL AU$0.02
47/294 263/294
1253 871
SL AU$0.08 1488 928
DL AU$0.50 1581 790
2190 2195 2200 2205 2210
Time Frame
0.0
0.2
0.4Bid
Bid Without TTFE Bid With TTFE
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
SL-FCAS Price
SL-FCAS Price
Contingency
Fig. 10. The bidding behaviors of the BESS in the SL sub-market.
substantially better capability in utilizing relatively small price
spreads to conduct more frequent arbitrage operations. The
bid amounts of the TTFE-embedded strategy in price spread
intervals, such as [0, 10), [10, 20), [20, 30), and [30, 40), are
approximately twice more than those of the strategy without
TTFE, as shown in Fig. 8. Such a performance gap may be
attributed to the introduction of our devised TTFE, which
effectively captures temporal trends of energy prices and
enables the BESS to be more responsive to small price spreads,
reflected by significant revenue boosts in Table II.
In Fig. 9, the BESS can conduct energy arbitrage after iden-
tifying slight price fluctuations when equipped with our TTFE-
embedded strategy, whereas the strategy without TTFE does
not respond to relatively small price spreads during intervals
[180, 200]. These results highlight the advantage of incorporat-
ing temporal information in energy arbitrage decision-making.
The interpretability of the attention mechanism used in our
TTFE-embedded strategy is further discussed in Section V-D2.
2) Contingency FCAS Market: Our proposed TTFE-
embedded strategy also performs significantly better in the
contingency FCAS market, where price spikes often occur
during contingency events. The integration of temporal infor-
mation in our strategy enables the BESS to be more responsive
to price spikes in FCAS markets during its multi-FCAS-market
participation, leading to improved performance compared to
the strategy without the TTFE. This superiority is evident from
the comparison results presented in Table IV.
The strategies with and without TTFE exhibit a significant
difference in their response to major increases in system
frequency, particularly in the provision of frequency-lower
services in the FL, SL, and DL sub-markets. The strategy
without TTFE is driven by the higher energy prices in the
FR, SR, and DR sub-markets, leading to frequent bid for
delivering frequency-raise services to increase profits. This
TABLE V
THE BESS IDLE STATISTICS IN THE SPOT AND JOINT -MARKET BIDDING .
SoC Level Spot Price (AU$/MWh) Idle Times
Mean Standard Deviation Spot Joint
Empty 3 44 3161 0
Full 214 47 352 0
behavior results in less focus on the frequency-lower sub-
markets, which have relatively lower energy prices. However,
providing frequency-lower services at contingency is the sole
power source of the BESS in the contingency FCAS bidding
scenario, and without adequate energy uptake from the grid,
the BESS’s SoC is getting drained and unable to continuously
bid in the frequency-raise sub-markets due to a lack of
available capacity.
In contrast, the TTFE-embedded strategy demonstrates su-
perior ability in providing frequency-lower services at con-
tingency, as shown in Table IV. Fig. 10 illustrates that the
BESS, with the TTFE-embedded strategy, bids for partial
power in the SL sub-market under varying energy prices and
successfully delivers SL-FCAS during contingency, while the
pure DRL-based strategy does not participate in the SL sub-
market. The TTFE-embedded strategy allows the BESS to be
more responsive to contingency events, particularly major rises
in system frequency, as depicted in Fig. 10. As a result, the
BESS with ample energy storage is able to submit bids in
the frequency-raise sub-markets more frequently, as shown in
Table IV, thereby enhancing its economic performance.
3) Joint Market: The BESS can fully realize its flexibility
by participating in both the spot and contingency FCAS mar-
kets. The contingency FCAS market serves as an alternative
to the spot market when prices in any of the six sub-markets
are promising.
As mentioned, the use of extracted temporal information
in the spot market greatly improves the BESS’s viability,
especially under small price fluctuations, but it still expe-
riences idle periods of around 20% of the evaluation time
frame when it is completely drained or fully charged. This
occurs when spot prices are exceptionally low or high, as
highlighted in Table V. Such inaction reduces the BESS’s
revenue generation potential. Joint bidding in the contingency
FCAS market eliminates such idle behavior and significantly
improves the BESS’s bidding outcomes, surpassing the results
of individual market participation by a significant margin in
all five jurisdictions of the NEM, as demonstrated in Table II.
D. Interpretability of the TempDRL
In DRL-based bidding strategies, there is an increasing
need for a clear understanding of the internal decision-making
mechanism, particularly how the model interprets the BESS’s
input state. To address this issue, we propose three new
interpretations of our TempDRL model, utilizing Q-value,
attention-based, and gradient-based approaches.
1) Q-value-based Interpretation: The Q-value, represented
by the function Q(st, at), measures the effectiveness of a
bidding decision based on the current state of the BESS. This
value serves as a crucial indicator for evaluating the BESS’s

12
0.2
0.4Q-value
Q-value Average Q-value
180 185 190 195 200 205
Time Frame
10
20
30Spot Price
Spot Price
1
0
1
Bid
Bid
Fig. 11. The normalized Q values when the BESS performs arbitrage.
175 180 185 190 195 200 205
Time Frame
10
20
30Spot Price
Past Spot Price Latest Spot Price
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Attention Weights
Attention Weights
Fig. 12. The relationship between attention weights and spot prices. The sum
of attention weights is equal to one due to the softmax operation.
understanding and utilization of energy prices. In Fig. 11,
we display normalized Q-values when the BESS carries out
energy arbitrage in the spot market (the same periods depicted
in Fig. 9). Fig. 11 reveals that Q-values (when the BESS
executes energy arbitrage) are significantly higher than those
during idle periods, which are from the 188th to 190th time
frames. This result suggests that, in our revenue-driven bidding
strategy, idleness is discouraged and results in lower Q-values.
This is because frequent arbitrage leads to a higher likelihood
of generating greater revenue, even when encountering small
price fluctuations, resulting in higher Q-values.
2) Attention-based Interpretation: The MHA mechanism
functions as the key component of the developed TTFE and
determines the relative temporal significance of each price
vector based on how it is influenced by other price vectors.
This allows the BESS to be aware of critical price signals. The
attention weights of a temporal segment can be seen in Fig. 12,
where historical spot prices close to the latest spot price receive
smaller attention weights, while those deviating from the latest
spot price receive larger attention weights. This suggests that
the TempDRL-empowered BESS is able to be temporally
aware and sensitive to past price fluctuations when making
bidding decisions. With the aid of the extracted temporal
information, the BESS can better perform energy arbitrage in
the spot market and be more responsive to contingency events
in the contingency FCAS market, which is consistent with our
findings in Section V-C1 and V-C2.
To justify our implication, we analyze the relationship
between the price spreads of latest and historical prices
and the corresponding attention weights of historical prices
in the whole test dataset. Specifically, for each input price
sequence of length L, denoted as ρt−1 = [ρS
t−1−L, · · · , ρS
t−1],
<-20 [-20,-10) [-10,-5) [-5,0) [0,5] (5,10] (10,20] >20
Price Spread Intervals
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25Att. Weights
Fig. 13. The distribution of price spreads with respect to attention weights.
<-20 [-20,-10) [-10,-5) [-5,0) [0,5] (5,10] (10,20] >20
Price Spread Interval
Bid Amount
 Avg. Gradient
Ch. Avg. 
Gradient
Dch. Avg. 
Gradient
Low
Gradient
High
Gradient
Fig. 14. The gradient map of bidding decisions with respect to price spreads.
we calculate the price spread between the latest spot price
ρS
t−1 and each historical price ρS
t−1−L+t′, where t′ is an
integer index variable from 0 to L − 1. A pair of the price
spread, i.e., ρS
t−1 − ρS
t−1−L+t′, and historical price’s attention
weight watt
t−1−L+t′ is recorded and employed to derive the
empirical distribution of price spreads to attention weights.
The distribution is depicted in Fig. 13, where we discretize the
continuous price spread into eight intervals, including less than
−20, [−20, −10), [−10, −5), [−5, 0), [0, 5], (5, 10], (10, 20],
and more than 20, and the attention weights within each
interval are averaged. The results demonstrate that historical
prices (which are lower or higher than the latest spot price)
gain larger attention weights, especially with the increase of
price spreads, suggesting that our model tends to focus on
fluctuating historical prices when making bidding decisions.
3) Gradient-based Interpretation: In addition to the above
Q-value-based and attention-based interpretations, we also
investigate whether our model is capable of employing price
fluctuation information via a gradient-based method. Specifi-
cally, we calculate the gradients of bidding decisions (includ-
ing both charging/discharging and bid power) with respect to
the price spreads (between latest price and historical prices).
As the neural networks are updated by gradient backprop-
agation during the gradient descent process, the computed
gradients can, to some extent, present the significance of how
the input price sequence is related to the bidding outcome [38].
A higher value of the input price’s gradient often indicates
that this feature is emphasized and relatively more important
during the decision-making process [39].
The average gradients of charging decision, discharging de-
cision, and bid power with respect to price spreads are depicted
in Fig. 14. In the gradient map, the gradients of price spreads,
e.g., [−20, −10) and (10, 20], are substantially larger than

13
those of small price spreads, e.g., [−5, 0) and [0, 5]. The results
suggest that significant historical price fluctuations are indeed
utilized, and impact final bidding decisions. Such findings are
coherent with the attention-weight-based interpretations shown
in Fig. 13, demonstrating our model’s ability to capture price
fluctuations for better decision-making.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We developed a model-free, temporal-aware DRL strategy,
referred to as TempDRL, for real-time joint bidding in the
spot and contingency FCAS markets. Our proposed TTFE
can capture temporal information of energy prices in both
markets, enabling our TempDRL strategy to be sensitive to
price fluctuations and make better bidding decisions. Our
results showed that: 1) bidding in the joint markets can
greatly enhance the viability of the BESS; and 2) the TTFE-
empowered DRL-based bidding strategy can make better de-
cisions, lead to significant outcomes compared to the P&O
benchmark. Additionally, our thorough analysis of bidding
behaviors in both individual and joint markets revealed three
insights: 1) the TTFE enhances the bidding strategy’s ability to
be aware of price fluctuations for optimal energy arbitrage in
the spot market; 2) the TTFE-assisted bidding strategy is more
responsive to contingency events in the contingency FCAS
market; and 3) joint bidding leverages the flexibility of both
markets to fully unlock the potential of the BESS. Moreover,
the simulation results were interpreted based on the Q value
and attention weights, providing a better understanding of the
bidding decision-making mechanism of the TempDRL.
Our proposed strategy provides a methodological framework
that the BESS owners can leverage to explore economic
opportunities in other prospective markets. As part of the Post-
2025 Market Design Options Paper [40], the Energy Security
Board (ESB) of Australia provides a vision of a future in which
the system services necessary for securing and stabilizing the
NEM are unbundled, allowing market participants to capitalize
on alternative revenue streams, such as the provision of inertia,
system strength and ramping capabilities, etc. A spot market-
based approach is expected to become the norm eventually
(as it is for energy and FCAS at the moment) for procuring
those essential services [40]. This means that the owners of
storage facilities, in particular utility-scale batteries, are able
to generate additional revenues outside the traditional energy
and FCAS markets. Our methodology may assist in harnessing
these emerging opportunities. As Australia is at the forefront
of the global energy transition, the successful demonstration
of our strategy in the Australian electricity system could
provide valuable insights for other countries embarking on the
transition to a clean energy system.
For future work, we aim to study the influence of bidding
strategies on grid emission, which is a critical metric for the
net-zero transition of the grid. We will also investigate more
realistic battery degradation characteristics of different types
of energy storage in grid bidding applications.
APPENDIX A: R EVENUE COMPARISONS OF THE TEMP DRL
AND BENCHMARKS IN NSW, QLD, SA, AND TAS
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-MLPDRL
FCAS-MLPDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-MLPDRL
(a) NSW – MLP-DRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-T empDRL
FCAS-T empDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-T empDRL (b) NSW – TempDRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0
1
2
3
4Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-MLPDRL
FCAS-MLPDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-MLPDRL
(c) QLD – MLP-DRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0
1
2
3
4Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-T empDRL
FCAS-T empDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-T empDRL (d) QLD – TempDRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0
1
2
3
4
5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-MLPDRL
FCAS-MLPDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-MLPDRL
(e) SA – MLP-DRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0
1
2
3
4
5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-T empDRL
FCAS-T empDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-T empDRL (f) SA – TempDRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0
1
2
3
4
5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-MLPDRL
FCAS-MLPDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-MLPDRL
(g) TAS – MLP-DRL
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0
1
2
3
4
5Revenue (AU$)
1e4
Spot-T empDRL
FCAS-T empDRL
Joint-LP&O
Joint-TP&O
Joint-T empDRL (h) TAS – TempDRL
Fig. 15. Revenue comparisons of the TempDRL method with benchmarks in
spot, contingency FCAS, and joint markets of NSW, QLD, SA, and TAS.

14
APPENDIX B: A BSOLUTE PERFORMANCE OF THE
TEMP DRL AND THE PIO B ENCHMARK IN THE JOINT
MARKET SCENARIO
VIC NSW QLD SA TAS0
2
4
6
8Revenue (AU$)
1e4
-30.0%
-30.0%
-37.0% -37.0%
-30.0%
T empDRL
PIO
Fig. 16. Revenue comparisons of the TempDRL and the PIO in the joint
market at five jurisdictions of the NEM.
APPENDIX C: E VALUATION REVENUES OF THE TEMP DRL
TRAINED WITH VARIOUS SIZES OF DATASET IN THE
JOINT-MARKET BIDDING OF VIC
0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8
Time Frame 1e4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0Revenue (AU$)
1e4
One-Month
Three-Month
Six-Month
T en-Month
Fig. 17. Revenue comparisons of the TempDRL trained with different sizes
of dataset in the joint markets of VIC.
REFERENCES
[1] IPCC, Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contri-
bution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , 2022.
[2] S. R. Sinsel, R. L. Riemke, and V . H. Hoffmann, “Challenges and
solution technologies for the integration of variable renewable energy
sources—a review,” Renewable Energy, vol. 145, pp. 2271–2285, 2020.
[3] Victoria, Victorian electricity sector renewable energy transition. State
Government of Victoria, 2022.
[4] ARENA, Large-scale Battery Storage Knowledge Sharing Report. Aus-
tralian Renewable Energy Agency, 2019.
[5] AEMO, Guide to Ancillary Services in the National Electricity Market .
Australian Energy Market Operator, 2015.
[6] ——, Market Ancillary Services Specification . Australian Energy
Market Operator, 2021.
[7] K. Abdulla, J. de Hoog, V . Muenzel, F. Suits, K. Steer, A. Wirth,
and S. Halgamuge, “Optimal operation of energy storage systems
considering forecasts and battery degradation,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 2086–2096, 2018.
[8] D. Krishnamurthy, C. Uckun, Z. Zhou, P. R. Thimmapuram, and
A. Botterud, “Energy storage arbitrage under day-ahead and real-time
price uncertainty,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 84–93, 2018.
[9] R. Weron, “Electricity price forecasting: A review of the state-of-the-
art with a look into the future,” International Journal of Forecasting ,
vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1030–1081, 2014.
[10] H. Wang and B. Zhang, “Energy storage arbitrage in real-time markets
via reinforcement learning,” IEEE Power & Energy Society General
Meeting (PESGM), 2018.
[11] V .-H. Bui, A. Hussain, and H.-M. Kim, “Double deep q -learning-
based distributed operation of battery energy storage system considering
uncertainties,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 11, no. 1, pp.
457–469, 2020.
[12] J. Cao, D. Harrold, Z. Fan, T. Morstyn, D. Healey, and K. Li, “Deep
reinforcement learning-based energy storage arbitrage with accurate
lithium-ion battery degradation model,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 4513–4521, 2020.
[13] H. Xu, X. Li, X. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Arbitrage of energy storage
in electricity markets with deep reinforcement learning,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1904.12232, 2019.
[14] X. Wei, Y . Xiang, J. Li, and X. Zhang, “Self-dispatch of wind-storage
integrated system: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Sustainable Energy , vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1861–1864,
2022.
[15] B. Huang and J. Wang, “Deep-reinforcement-learning-based capacity
scheduling for pv-battery storage system,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2272–2283, 2021.
[16] M. Anwar, C. Wang, F. de Nijs, and H. Wang, “Proximal policy
optimization based reinforcement learning for joint bidding in energy
and frequency regulation markets,” IEEE Power & Energy Society
General Meeting (PESGM) , 2022.
[17] AEMO, Changes to Contingency FCAS Volumes . Australian Energy
Market Operator, 2019.
[18] K. Bradbury, L. Pratson, and D. Pati ˜no-Echeverri, “Economic viability
of energy storage systems based on price arbitrage potential in real-time
u.s. electricity markets,” Applied Energy, vol. 114, pp. 512–519, 2014.
[19] D. McConnell, T. Forcey, and M. Sandiford, “Estimating the value of
electricity storage in an energy-only wholesale market,” Applied Energy,
vol. 159, pp. 422–432, 2015.
[20] D. Zafirakis, K. J. Chalvatzis, G. Baiocchi, and G. Daskalakis, “The
value of arbitrage for energy storage: Evidence from european electricity
markets,” Applied Energy, vol. 184, pp. 971–986, 2016.
[21] L. He and J. Zhang, “Energy trading in local electricity markets
with behind-the-meter solar and energy storage,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Markets, Policy and Regulation, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 107–117, 2023.
[22] W. Chen, J. Qiu, J. Zhao, Q. Chai, and Z. Y . Dong, “Bargaining game-
based profit allocation of virtual power plant in frequency regulation
market considering battery cycle life,”IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2913–2928, 2021.
[23] J. Wang, D. K. Mishra, L. Li, and J. Zhang, “Demand side manage-
ment and peer-to-peer energy trading for industrial users using two-
level multi-agent reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
Markets, Policy and Regulation , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 23–36, 2023.
[24] J. Jeong, S. W. Kim, and H. Kim, “Deep reinforcement learning
based real-time renewable energy bidding with battery control,” IEEE
Transactions on Energy Markets, Policy and Regulation , vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 85–96, 2023.
[25] P. B ¨ohm, P. Pounds, and A. C. Chapman, “Feature extraction for
effective and efficient deep reinforcement learning on real robotic
platforms,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2023, pp. 7126–7132.
[26] J. Liu, B.-Y . Tsai, and D.-S. Chen, “Deep reinforcement learning
based controller with dynamic feature extraction for an industrial claus
process,” Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers , vol.
146, p. 104779, 2023.
[27] AEMO, How the National Electricity Market works. Australian Energy
Market Operator, 2020.
[28] J. Li, C. Wang, Y . Zhang, and H. Wang, “Learn to bid: Deep reinforce-
ment learning with transformer for energy storage bidding in energy and
contingency reserve markets,” in NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Tackling
Climate Change with Machine Learning , 2022.
[29] AEMO, Battery Energy Storage System Requirements for Contingency
FCAS Registration. Australian Energy Market Operator, 2022.
[30] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, vol. 80, 10–15 Jul 2018, pp. 1861–1870.
[31] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. u. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 30, 2017.

15
[32] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” 2013. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.4400
[33] O. Lockwood and M. Si, “A review of uncertainty for deep reinforcement
learning,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Interactive Digital Entertainment , vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 155–162, Oct.
2022.
[34] M. D. Badoual and S. J. Moura, “A learning-based optimal market
bidding strategy for price-maker energy storage,” in 2021 American
Control Conference (ACC), 2021, pp. 526–532.
[35] S. Mitchell, M. OSullivan, and I. Dunning, “PuLP: a linear programming
toolkit for python,” The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand,
vol. 65, 2011.
[36] P. Donti, B. Amos, and J. Z. Kolter, “Task-based end-to-end model
learning in stochastic optimization,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[37] X. Chen, Y . Liu, and L. Wu, “Towards improving operation economics:
A bilevel mip-based closed-loop predict-and-optimize framework for
prescribing unit commitment,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2208.13065, 2022.
[38] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje, “Learning important
features through propagating activation differences,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , vol. 70, 06–11
Aug 2017, pp. 3145–3153.
[39] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan, “Axiomatic attribution for deep
networks,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning - Volume 70 , ser. ICML’17, 2017, p. 3319–3328.
[40] ESB, Post-2025 Market Design Directions Paper . Energy Security
Board, 2021.
Jinhao Li received the B.E. degree in smart grid
information engineering with a double B.S. degree in
mathematics from the University of Electronic Sci-
ence and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu,
China, in 2022. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree with the Department of Data Science
and AI, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. His research
focuses on machine learning for energy systems.
Changlong Wang received the Ph.D. degree in sci-
ence from the University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia, in 2021. He is a Research Fellow
with Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia,
specializing in energy system modeling. He is also
a Climate Future Fellow with the University of
Melbourne and a visiting scholar with the University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK. He represents Australia
on multiple IEA Hydrogen TCP tasks on hydrogen
modeling. His Economic Fairways Mapper team was
awarded the Australian Eureka Prize in 2023.
Yanru Zhang (S’13-M’16) received the B.S. de-
gree in electronic engineering from the University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China
(UESTC), Chengdu, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Department of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering, University of Houston (UH),
Houston, TX, USA, in 2016. She worked as the
Postdoctoral Fellow at UH and the Chinese Univer-
sity of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, successively. She
is currently a Professor with UESTC, affiliated with
both Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study and
School of Computer Science and Engineering. Her research involves game
theory, machine learning, deep learning in network economics, Internet and
applications, wireless communications, and networking. She received the Best
Paper Award with IEEE HPCC 2022, DependSys 2022, ICCC 2017, and ICCS
2016.
Hao Wang (M’16) received his Ph.D. in information
engineering from The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, in 2016. He was a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow at Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA, and a Washington Research Foundation
Innovation Fellow at the University of Washington,
Seattle, W A, USA. He is currently a Senior Lecturer
and ARC DECRA Fellow with the Department
of Data Science and AI, Faculty of IT, Monash
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. His research
interests include optimization, machine learning, and
data analytics for power and energy systems.