Citation: Rahman, T.; Alharbi, T.
Exploring Lithium-Ion Battery
Degradation: A Concise Review of
Critical Factors, Impacts, Data-Driven
Degradation Estimation Techniques,
and Sustainable Directions for Energy
Storage Systems. Batteries 2024, 10,
220. https://doi.org/10.3390/
batteries10070220
Academic Editor: Xiaolei Bian
Received: 28 March 2024
Revised: 18 May 2024
Accepted: 27 May 2024
Published: 22 June 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
batteries
Review
Exploring Lithium-Ion Battery Degradation: A Concise Review
of Critical Factors, Impacts, Data-Driven Degradation Estimation
Techniques, and Sustainable Directions for Energy
Storage Systems
T uhibur Rahman1 and Talal Alharbi 2,*
1 Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Green University of Bangladesh,
Kanchon 1460, Bangladesh; tuhibur.rahman@gmail.com
2 Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, Qassim University, Qassim,
Buraydah 52571, Saudi Arabia
* Correspondence: atalal@qu.edu.sa
Abstract: Batteries play a crucial role in the domain of energy storage systems and electric vehicles
by enabling energy resilience, promoting renewable integration, and driving the advancement of
eco-friendly mobility. However, the degradation of batteries over time remains a significant challenge.
This paper presents a comprehensive review aimed at investigating the intricate phenomenon of
battery degradation within the realm of sustainable energy storage systems and electric vehicles
(EVs). This review consolidates current knowledge on the diverse array of factors influencing battery
degradation mechanisms, encompassing thermal stresses, cycling patterns, chemical reactions, and
environmental conditions. The key degradation factors of lithium-ion batteries such as electrolyte
breakdown, cycling, temperature, calendar aging, and depth of discharge are thoroughly discussed.
Along with the key degradation factor, the impacts of these factors on lithium-ion batteries including
capacity fade, reduction in energy density, increase in internal resistance, and reduction in overall
efficiency have also been highlighted throughout the paper. Additionally, the data-driven approaches
of battery degradation estimation have taken into consideration. Furthermore, this paper delves
into the multifaceted impacts of battery degradation on the performance, longevity, and overall
sustainability of energy storage systems and EVs. Finally, the main drawbacks, issues and challenges
related to the lifespan of batteries are addressed. Recommendations, best practices, and future
directions are also provided to overcome the battery degradation issues towards sustainable energy
storage system.
Keywords: degradation; electric vehicles; energy storage; battery management systems; electric
batteries; lithium-ion batteries; mathematical model
1. Introduction
Batteries serve as indispensable energy storage devices, converting chemical energy
into electrical energy, thereby powering numerous aspects of modern life [1]. These batteries
enable the consistent supply of electricity, overcoming the intermittency of renewable
energy production, and ensuring a reliable power source even during periods of low
generation [2]. Moreover, batteries are the heart of electric vehicles, powering their engines
and enabling them to function without reliance on traditional fossil fuels. The development
of high-capacity, durable, and fast-charging batteries has been instrumental in driving the
adoption of electric vehicles, significantly reducing greenhouse gas emissions and paving
the way for a more sustainable future in transportation [3]. As technological advancements
continue to improve battery efficiency and capacity, their role in both energy storage systems
and electric vehicles becomes increasingly pivotal in the global shift towards cleaner and
Batteries 2024, 10, 220. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries10070220 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/batteries

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 2 of 32
more efficient energy utilization [2]. Battery technologies, despite their widespread use
and critical role in modern society, grapple with several significant drawbacks [4]. One of
the primary limitations is the degradation of batteries over time. This constraint impacts
their efficiency, notably in applications like electric vehicles and portable electronics, where
battery life and increased extended range are paramount. Additionally, the capacity
degradation of batteries presents a crucial challenge, leading to reduced performance and
the eventual need for replacement or recycling.
Battery degradation refers to the progressive loss of a battery’s capacity and perfor-
mance over time, presenting a significant challenge in various applications relying on stored
energy [5]. Figure 1 shows the battery degradation mechanism. Several factors contribute
to battery degradation. One primary cause is cycling, where the repeated charging and
discharging of a battery causes chemical and physical changes within the battery cells. This
leads to the gradual breakdown of electrode materials, diminishing the ability of the battery
to hold a charge. Elevated temperature, another factor that accelerates chemical reactions
within the battery, hastens degradation [6]. Overcharging or deep discharging a battery
beyond its recommended voltage limits can also accelerate degradation by causing physical
stress on the electrodes or electrolyte [3]. Additionally, storage conditions and the type of
battery chemistry play crucial roles; some chemistries are more prone to degradation than
others. As batteries degrade, their overall capacity diminishes, reducing their ability to
provide power, ultimately leading to decreased performance and the need for replacement
or refurbishment [7]. Strategies such as optimal charging practices, temperature manage-
ment, and advancements in battery chemistry aim to mitigate degradation and extend
battery lifespan.
Batteries 2024, 10, 220 2 of 34 
 
advancements continue to improve battery effic iency and capacity, their role in both en-
ergy storage systems and electric vehicles becomes increasingly pivotal in the global shift 
towards cleaner and more efficient energy util ization [2]. Battery technologies, despite 
their widespread use and critical role in modern society, grapple with several significant 
drawbacks [4]. One of the primary limitations is the degradation of batteries over time. 
This constraint impacts their efficiency, notably in applications like electric vehicles and 
portable electronics, where battery life and increased extended range are paramount. Ad-
ditionally, the capacity degradation of batter ies presents a crucial challenge, leading to 
reduced performance and the eventual need for replacement or recycling. 
Battery degradation refers to the progressive loss of a battery’s capacity and perfor-
mance over time, presenting a significant challenge in various applications relying on 
stored energy [5]. Figure 1 shows the battery degradation mechanism. Several factors con-
tribute to battery degradation. One primary cause is cycling, where the repeated charging 
and discharging of a battery causes chemical and physical changes within the battery cells. 
This leads to the gradual breakdown of electrode materials, diminishing the ability of the 
battery to hold a charge. Elevated temperatur e, another factor that accelerates chemical 
reactions within the battery, hastens degradation [6]. Overcharging or deep discharging a 
battery beyond its recommended voltage limits can also accelerate degradation by causing 
physical stress on the electrodes or electrol yte [3]. Additionally, storage conditions and 
the type of battery chemistry play crucial roles; some chemistries are more prone to deg-
radation than others. As batteries degrade, their overall capacity diminishes, reducing 
their ability to provide power, ultimately leading to decreased performance and the need 
for replacement or refurbishment [7]. Strategies such as optimal charging practices, tem-
perature management, and advancements in battery chemistry aim to mitigate degrada-
tion and extend battery lifespan. 
 
Figure 1. Degradation mechanism of lithium-ion battery [8]. 
Battery degradation significantly impacts energy storage systems, compromising 
their efficiency and reliability over time [9]. As batteries degrade, their capacity to store 
and deliver energy diminishes, resulting in re duced overall energy storage capabilities. 
This degradation translates into shorter operational lifespans for energy storage systems, 
requiring more frequent replacements or refurbishments, which escalates operational 
costs. Moreover, decreased storage capacity limits the amount of renewable energy that 
can be stored, affecting the system’s ability to provide consistent power during peak de-
mand or when renewable sources are not actively generating energy [10]. This fluctuation 
in storage capacity due to degradation can create challenges in maintaining a stable and 
reliable power supply from renewable sources, impacting grid stability and the integra-
tion of renewable energy into the electrical grid. 
Figure 1. Degradation mechanism of lithium-ion battery [8].
Battery degradation significantly impacts energy storage systems, compromising
their efficiency and reliability over time [9]. As batteries degrade, their capacity to store
and deliver energy diminishes, resulting in reduced overall energy storage capabilities.
This degradation translates into shorter operational lifespans for energy storage systems,
requiring more frequent replacements or refurbishments, which escalates operational costs.
Moreover, decreased storage capacity limits the amount of renewable energy that can be
stored, affecting the system’s ability to provide consistent power during peak demand
or when renewable sources are not actively generating energy [ 10]. This fluctuation in
storage capacity due to degradation can create challenges in maintaining a stable and
reliable power supply from renewable sources, impacting grid stability and the integration
of renewable energy into the electrical grid.
The performance, range, and general usability of electric vehicles (EV) are all signif-
icantly impacted by battery deterioration [ 11]. The driving range of an electric vehicle
(EV) decreases with battery deterioration, affecting the amount of distance it can drive
between charges. Degradation-related reduction in battery capacity also results in a drop

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 3 of 32
in power output, which impacts the vehicle’s acceleration and general performance. In
addition, EV drivers must charge their cars more frequently to go the same distance as
their battery’s capacity decreases, which raises operating costs and annoyance [12]. Fur-
thermore, a deteriorating battery that has to be replaced may turn off potential buyers,
which lowers the resale value of electric vehicles. Addressing battery degradation through
technological advancements, efficient battery management systems, and improvements
in battery chemistry remains crucial to prolonging the lifespan of EV batteries and en-
suring the long-term viability and attractiveness of electric vehicles in the transportation
sector [13]. The lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery is a form of intercalation-type battery that is
mostly utilized in electric vehicles (EVs). Intercalation-type batteries are a specific category
of rechargeable batteries where the energy storage mechanism involves the insertion and
extraction of ions or molecules into the crystal structure of the electrode material during
charging and discharging cycles. Consequently, the most-often utilized batteries in EVs
are intercalation-type batteries, most especially Li-ion batteries. So, this study will mainly
focus on the intercalation types of batteries. In recent years, data-driven approaches have
emerged as powerful tools for estimating battery degradation. Leveraging vast amounts
of historical and real-time data, these techniques offer a holistic understanding of battery
health and degradation patterns [14]. By harnessing advanced analytics, machine learn-
ing algorithms, and statistical modeling, data-driven methods enable precise predictions
of degradation rates, allowing stakeholders to proactively address issues and optimize
operational parameters [15].
Recently, battery degradation became an issue of great concern among the researchers
around the world [ 16]. Xiong et al. presented a review about the aging mechanism of
lithium-ion batteries [17]. Authors have claimed that the degradation mechanism of lithium-
ion batteries affected anode, cathode and other battery structures, which are influenced
by some external factors such as temperature. However, the effect of battery degradation
on EV and energy storage system has not been taken into consideration. Jialong et al.
investigated battery degradation behavior at a low temperature using destructive and
nano-destructive methods, where it has been found that a high charging rate accelerates the
battery aging at a low temperature [18]. The rate of aging of a battery charging at 0.6 ◦C is
higher than a battery charging at 0.8 ◦C. Although the aging rate at a low temperature has
been investigated, what the situation will be at a high temperature has not been explained.
Further study is still required. Guo et al. presented a review about the aging mechanism of
lithium-ion batteries in EV where the aging behavior of lithium-ion batteries in charging,
stand-by, and driving modes are reviewed [19]. Xu et al. proposed a data-driven battery
degradation estimation model. The authors explained the estimation method with accuracy;
however, the battery degradation effect on energy storage systems and electric vehicles still
needs to be investigated [14]. Wankmüller et al. presented a case study about the impact of
battery degradation on energy storage systems; however, the authors did not investigate the
case of electric vehicles [20]. In another work, Ou explained in detail the impact of battery
aging on EV [21]. The author claimed that battery degradation can be delayed by around
0.5% with the help of a battery thermal management system. Higher outside temperatures
enhance the use of BEV batteries. For example, compared to the New England area, the
Los Angeles area has 6% higher battery capacity; however, this paper does not provide
any information about the degradation mechanism of EV batteries [ 21]. Kaliaperumal
et al. presented a review about the mitigation techniques of battery degradation where the
authors claimed that the use of extra protective mechanisms, fire suppression, ventilation,
and intrinsic safety as mitigation techniques in LiB can help them overcome the failure
modes; however, the issues and challenges of these techniques have not been taken into
consideration [22]. Further study is still required in this regard. Table 1 summarizes the
current research status of battery degradation.

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 4 of 32
Table 1. Current research status of battery degradation for EVs and energy storage systems.
Goal Key Findings Research Gap Reference
Degradation
mechanism of
lithium-ion batteries
Lithium-ion batteries degraded over time
when used. External factors such as
temperature can influence the degradation
mechanism.
The authors have presented a review
about the degradation mechanism;
however, the effects of battery
degradation are still required for better
understanding.
[17]
Battery aging at lower
temperature.
A high charging rate accelerates the battery
aging at a low temperature. The rate of aging
of the battery charging at 0.6 °C is higher
than the battery charging at 0.8 °C
Although the aging rate at a low
temperature has been investigated, what
the situation will be at a high
temperature has not been explained.
[18]
Aging mechanism of
lithium-ion batteries
for EVS
It is possible to extend the battery life by
reducing exposure to the factors that most
quickly age batteries. Low temperatures
expedite the metallization of lithium on the
anode, whereas high temperatures will result
in side reactions in the battery.
More study is still needed on the issue of
battery deterioration, particularly in
relation to the operation of EVs. There is
currently relatively little research on
battery performance deterioration and
the identification of the aging mechanism
that follows.
[19]
Data-driven battery
aging mechanism
approach.
Different battery degradation factor such as
temperature, charge cut off voltage, charge
current, discharge cut off voltage, discharge
current have great influence on battery
degradation and depend on how the battery
degradation varies in different aging phases.
Although the authors presented a model
for estimating battery degradation
accurately, the impact of battery
degradation on EVs and energy storage
systems has not been taken into
consideration.
[14]
Impact of battery
degradation on the
energy storage system.
Depending on the degradation model and
EOL criteria for a C-rate of 1C, the revenue
drop resulting from deterioration ranges
from 12 to 46%.
The effect of battery degradation on
energy storage systems has been carefully
investigated; however, the case of EVs
still needs to be investigated.
[20]
Long-term impact of
battery degradation on
electric vehicles.
The battery degradation can be delayed by
around 0.5% with the help of the battery
thermal management system. Higher outside
temperatures enhance the use of BEV
batteries. Compared to the New England
area, the Los Angeles area has 6% higher
battery capacity.
Although having a contribution on the
impact of battery degradation for EV , this
paper ignores the battery degradation
mechanism for electric vehicles.
[21]
Battery degradation
mitigation techniques.
The use of extra protective mechanisms, fire
suppression, ventilation, and intrinsic safety
as mitigation techniques in LiBs can help
them overcome the failure modes.
This paper provides a lot of information
about mitigation techniques for battery
degradation; however, the issues and
challenges regarding this have not been
addressed.
[22]
To bridge the gaps in the field of battery degradation, this paper will provide a compre-
hensive review for the degradation factors, aging mechanisms, and the data-driven approaches
to the modeling of battery degradation, considering both electric vehicles and energy storage
systems. Future research directions in this field will also be a part of this work.
This paper is divided into six sections. Section 2 presents the battery degradation
mechanism in brief. Key degradation factors are shown in Section 3. In Section 4, the
effects of battery degradation in EVs and energy storage systems are reported. Data-driven
algorithms, strategies, and approaches regarding battery degradation are highlighted in
Section 5. Lastly, the conclusion and future directions are suggested in Section 6.
2. Battery Degradation Mechanism
The degradation of lithium-ion battery can be mainly seen in the anode and the
cathode. In the anode, the formation of a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) increases the
impendence which degrades the battery capacity. Mechanical stress results in a crack in the

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 5 of 32
surface layer, and lithium plating makes the formation of dendrite on the surface of anode
layer. On the other hand, cathode degradation occurs due to a film on the cathode surface
layer, stress, and dissolution of transition material.
2.1. Degradation in Anode
To create improved anodes for rechargeable lithium batteries, a great deal of research
has been conducted during the last three decades. Negative electrodes, or battery anodes,
are typically composed of silicon, lithium metal, titanate, graphite, or various composite
materials [22]. Commercial batteries use graphite-based anodes, including graphite anodes
and graphite–silicon composite anodes [23]. Carbon materials have dominated the market
for negative electrode materials due to their high electronic/ionic conductivity, affordability,
availability of raw materials, and suitable mechanical and thermal qualities [24]. This is
particularly true of graphite with consistent performance. Degradation in the battery anode
mainly occurs due to SEI, lithium plating, and stress.
2.1.1. Degradation in the Layer of Solid Electrolyte Interphase
Graphite is used as the main anode material in most lithium-ion batteries. Graphite
anodes operate in the 0.05–1 V range, which is beyond the 1–4.5 V window for organic
electrolyte stability [25]. Because of this, graphite-based LIBs produce a reductive electrolyte
breakdown process due to their thermodynamic instability. Li+ ions are consumed in this
process, which also creates a surface layer on the anode that leads to loss of active material
(LAM) [26] and loss of lithium inventory (LLI) [27]. The rapid reaction rate, particularly in
the initial few cycles, produces a surface layer that is permeable to Li ions but less permeable
to electrolyte components. As a result, there is less degradation and subsequent electrode
corrosion [28,29]. Nonetheless, throughout the life of the battery, solvated lithium and
other electrolyte components are still transported through this semipermeable layer even
while the reaction rate decreases. This reaction mostly takes place in the solid electrolyte
interphase (SEI) layer, which is the interphase between the electrolyte and the anode. The
primary cause of graphite anode aging is frequently the expansion of the SEI layer. It
lowers the capacity of the battery to hold energy and its ability to handle power. Another
kind of anode surface layer, known as the non-SEI layer, is known to form on the basal
plane surface and is impervious to Li ions [30]. It is common to refer to both the SEI and
non-SEI layers as the SEI layer [31]. Thus, the same custom is also adhered to here. The
SEI keeps growing once it first forms, both when it is cycling and when it is not. The
operational circumstances of the cell determine how quickly the SEI layer develops [32].
Agubra et al. presented the main factor of SEI formation which are electrolyte flow rate,
electrolyte composition, charging current, voltage, and pressure [33]. Figure 2 shows the
formation of SEI on a lithium-ion battery. Temperature and SOC are the primary drivers of
SEI development under idle circumstances. More Li ions are intercalated into the anode
at a greater SOC, which lowers the anode potential and speeds up the reductive reaction
rate [34]. Agubra et al. claimed that SEI formation undergoes a very critical evolution of
pre-formation, self-improvement, and gradual decay in succession at 25 ◦C [33]. At high
temperature, a film of LiF and Li2CO2 forms which increases the impedance and triggers
the anode towards degradation. The ionic conductivity of the SEI layer is further reduced
by rising temperatures, which can speed up the reaction rate and may convert less stable
organic SEI components into more stable inorganic compounds. Not even thermal runaway
can prevent the cell from exploding or catching fire at severe temperatures exceeding60 ◦C.
The volume variations brought on by the (de)intercalation of Li ions during cycling, in
addition to SOC and temperature, put mechanical stress on the electrodes. These variations
in volume have the ability to breach the SEI and initiate new reactions. This fracture and
repair cause the SEI to keep expanding, which leads to more LLI [26] and LAM [27].
In addition, cycling produces a more porous SEI layer than idling, especially at
high C-rates [35]. While a denser SEI layer lowers the reaction rate, this greater porosity
permits more reductive processes to occur. Electrolyte composition and electrode balance

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 6 of 32
are other parameters that impact the pace of reaction [ 36]. There are two competing
hypotheses on how SEI form: (1) According to the first hypothesis, formation occurs at
the electrode–electrolyte interface, and the SEI’s electrical conductivity ought to be the
formation’s limiting factor [17]. (2) According to the second hypothesis, solvent diffusion
limits SEI production, which occurs at the anode–SEI contact [37]. Nonetheless, the aging
behavior resulting from both hypotheses follows a time connection, which is consistent
with the passivation character of the SEI layer and is frequently shown in tests.
Batteries 2024, 10, 220 6 of 34 
 
less stable organic SEI components into more stable inorganic compounds. Not even ther-
mal runaway can prevent the cell from exploding or catching fire at severe temperatures 
exceeding 60 °C. The volume variations brought on by the (de)intercalation of Li ions dur-
ing cycling, in addition to SOC and temperature, put mechanical stress on the electrodes. 
These variations in volume have the ability to breach the SEI and initiate new reactions. 
This fracture and repair cause the SEI to keep expanding, which leads to more LLI [26] 
and LAM [27]. 
In addition, cycling produces a more porous SEI layer than idling, especially at high 
C-rates [35]. While a denser SEI layer lowers the reaction rate, this greater porosity permits 
more reductive processes to occur. Electrolyte composition and electrode balance are 
other parameters that impact the pace of reaction [36]. There are two competing hypothe-
ses on how SEI form: (1) According to the firs t hypothesis, formation occurs at the elec-
trode–electrolyte interface, and the SEI’s electrical conductivity ought to be the for-
mation’s limiting factor [17]. (2) According to the second hypothesis, solvent diffusion 
limits SEI production, which occurs at the anode–SEI contact [37]. Nonetheless, the aging 
behavior resulting from both hypotheses follows a time connection, which is consistent 
with the passivation character of the SEI layer and is frequently shown in tests. 
 
Figure 2. Process of SEI film production in the electr olyte based on EC. Snapshots of the reaction 
products taken every 25 ns throughout a 100 ns period. Bulk EC and 𝑃𝐹଺-anions are not displayed 
for viewing reasons. Li+ that have not participated in any reactions are magenta in color [38]. 
At the electrode–SEI interface, the solvent and lithium ions pass through the SEI layer 
and react with the surface electrons to prod uce an insoluble product. Different SEI mod-
eling techniques have been presented in [39–41]. According to Fick’s second law, solvent 
diffusion through the SEI layer will be as follows [39]: 
𝛿𝐶௦
𝛿𝑡 =𝐷 ௦
𝛿ଶ𝐶௦ 
𝛿𝑧ଶ  (1)
where 𝐶௦ is the concentration of the solvent in pores and 𝐷௦ is the effective diffusivity of 
the solvents. The liquid electrolyte fills the holes in the SEI and reaches the electrode sur-
face because the SEI layer has a porous struct ure. Thus, the first boundary condition is 
determined by the effective solvent concentrat ion at the electrolyte/SEI, which is as fol-
lows [39]: 
𝑎𝑡 𝑧 = 0 𝐶௦ =𝜀 𝐶௦଴ (2)
Figure 2. Process of SEI film production in the electrolyte based on EC. Snapshots of the reaction
products taken every 25 ns throughout a 100 ns period. Bulk EC and PF6-anions are not displayed for
viewing reasons. Li+ that have not participated in any reactions are magenta in color [38].
At the electrode–SEI interface, the solvent and lithium ions pass through the SEI
layer and react with the surface electrons to produce an insoluble product. Different SEI
modeling techniques have been presented in [ 39–41]. According to Fick’s second law,
solvent diffusion through the SEI layer will be as follows [39]:
δCs
δt = Ds
δ2Cs
δz2 (1)
where Cs is the concentration of the solvent in pores and Ds is the effective diffusivity
of the solvents. The liquid electrolyte fills the holes in the SEI and reaches the electrode
surface because the SEI layer has a porous structure. Thus, the first boundary condition
is determined by the effective solvent concentration at the electrolyte/SEI, which is as
follows [39]:
at z = 0 Cs = εC0
s (2)
where ε represents the porosity of the layer, andC0
s is the concentration of the bulk solution.
The kinetics of the irreversible formation process of the product are expressed using a Tafel
expression as follows [39]:
at z = L(t)JSEI = −kSEI Csexp
 
−αcF
 
Eeq(SOC) − USEI

RT
!
(3)
where USEI is the reaction of solvent reduction equilibrium potential and kSEI is its rate
constant. Moreover, Eeq which depends on SOC, is the anode’s open circuit potential. The
rate of the solvent reduction process, JSEI , and the growth rate of the SEI layer brought on

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 7 of 32
by the creation of the insoluble product, determine the solvent flow at the SEI/electrode
interface [39].
−Ds
δCs
δz |z=L(t) = −JSEI = CP
dL
dt (4)
where L is the thickness of the SEI layer and CP is the molar density of the reaction product.
The ratio of the number of lost lithium ions in the SEI to the number of starting lithium
ions is known as the capacity loss, or x(t) [40].
x(t) = ZPCPAAnode
N0
L(t) (5)
where N0 is the starting number of moles of lithium ions in the cell, AAnode is the anode
surface area, and ZP is the number of Li atoms in the product.
2.1.2. Lithium Plating
Lithium plating, which happens during charging when lithium ions unevenly de-
posit on the anode, generating metallic lithium, is one major cause for concern in battery
degradation [41]. The mechanism of lithium plating is shown in Figure 3. Exposure to low
temperatures or rapid charging frequently intensifies this effect. For example, charging a
7.5 Ah cell at 1 C rate at 0 ◦C would result in a significant 3.6% capacity loss [42]. The three
following main variables cause the power and energy densities of a lithium-ion battery
to decrease at low temperatures, especially when charging: 1. inadequate charge-transfer
rate; 2. low solid diffusivity of lithium ions in the electrode; and 3. reduced ionic conduc-
tivity in the electrolyte [ 43–45]. Ionic conductivity in the electrolyte diminishes, which
causes an increase in cell internal resistance; nevertheless, this is not the primary issue with
low-temperature charging. Lithium plating at low temperatures, where lithium ions collect
at the interface between carbon particles and electrolytes, may be primarily caused by
poor Li+ diffusivity inside the electrodes [46,47]. Dendrite development, which can result
in internal short circuits, overheating, or even explosions, increases internal resistance,
capacity loss, and safety issues associated with lithium plating [48,49]. Lower temperatures,
often below 20 ◦C, cause the intercalation potential of graphite material to approach that
of metallic lithium and decrease the diffusion rate of lithium into the anode or electrolyte.
As a result, metallic lithium plating could happen. High C-rates, low temperatures, and
low SOC are particularly conducive to lithium plating [ 43]. During fast charging, there
is a greater chance that the charging rate will surpass the intercalation rate. The quantity
of Li+ ions transferred during the charge-transfer process from the cathode to the anode
per unit of time rises at a high C-rate [ 44]. High SOC has a great impact on the lithium
plating. The impact of high SOC on graphite/LCO 5 Ah pouch cells at different cutoff
voltages ranging from 4.2 V to 4.8 V was investigated by Juarez-Robles et al. [45]. Significant
capacity decline, lithium plating, electrolyte breakdown, and volume expansion were seen
in cells charged over 4.5 V . The cells that were charged to 4.6 V , 4.7 V , and 4.8 V showed
dendritic structures [45]. Moreover, the anode resistance may approach a critical limit
beyond a particular age. Lithium plating begins at this limit, where the anode potential
falls below 0 V against Li/Li+ [46]. Lithium plating, in contrast to SEI layer development,
is a positive reinforcing event whereby the deposits on the anode reduce the active surface
area, which raises the current density at the remaining accessible pores and increases the
metal plating. This leads to the observation of a knee point in the deterioration behavior
at the age of lithium plating. Lithium plating results in LLI and may make the cell less
safe since it can induce internal short circuits by allowing lithium dendrites to form [17].
Various modeling techniques of lithium plating have been presented in [50–53]. Lithium
plating can be estimated using the Butler–Volmer equation [ 47]. Zhao et al. utilized a
reduced order model to consider the lithium plating evolution as shown in the following
equations [54]:
JLi
total = Jli + JLi
Plating (6)

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 8 of 32
JLi
Plating = asi0,p

exp
 αa,pFηp
RT

− exp

− αc,pFηLi
RT
 
(7)
Batteries 2024, 10, 220 8 of 34 
 
increases the metal plating. This leads to the observation of a knee point in the deteriora-
tion behavior at the age of lithium plating. Lithium plating results in LLI and may make 
the cell less safe since it can induce internal short circuits by allowing lithium dendrites to 
form [17]. Various modeling techniques of lithium plating have been presented in [50–53]. 
Lithium plating can be estimated using the Bu tler–Volmer equation [47]. Zhao et al. uti-
lized a reduced order model to consider the lithium plating evolution as shown in the 
following equations [54]: 
𝐽௧௢௧௔௟
௅௜ = 𝐽௟௜ + 𝐽௉௟௔௧௜௡௚
௅௜  (6)
 𝐽௉௟௔௧௜௡௚
௅௜ =𝑎 ௦𝑖଴,௣ ൤exp ൬𝛼௔,௣𝐹𝜂௣
𝑅𝑇  ൰ − exp ൬−𝛼௖,௣𝐹𝜂௅௜
𝑅𝑇 ൰ ൨ (7)
 
Figure 3. Degradation mechanism in anode due to lithium plating [55]. 
2.1.3. Stress 
One of the main factors contributing to lithium-ion battery degradation is mechanical 
stress at the anode [56]. There is a number of negative consequences that might arise from 
mechanical stress on the anode. Initially, the anode material may experience physical 
damage from the stress, such as deformation or cracking, which would compromise its 
structural integrity and lessen its capacity to store and release lithium ions during cycles 
of charging and discharging [57]. Wang et al. investigated the mechanical stress on the 
anode and cathode and found cracks in both surface and cross-sectional areas [58], as 
shown in Figure 4. This damage may cause the internal resistance to rise, which would 
lower its overall performance and efficiency. Furthermore, mechanical stress could permit 
the electrolyte to penetrate the anode material and start chemical reactions that eventually 
weaken the anode and reduce battery capacity  [50]. Moreover, internal short circuits 
brought on by stress-induced dendritic formation—a process in which microscopic lith-
ium metal fibers protrude from the anode su rface—can enter the separator and result in 
safety hazards like thermal runaway, overheatin g, or even explosions [51–53,59]. As the 
particles go through a phase transition, the intercalation of lithium ions into the anode 
may cause sudden variations in volume [60,61]. As more lithium is added, the orientation 
of the molecules shifts during a phase transition, producing distinct geometrical and elec-
trical features. This results in mechanical stress brought on by a volume shift, which can 
Figure 3. Degradation mechanism in anode due to lithium plating [55].
2.1.3. Stress
One of the main factors contributing to lithium-ion battery degradation is mechanical
stress at the anode [ 56]. There is a number of negative consequences that might arise
from mechanical stress on the anode. Initially, the anode material may experience physical
damage from the stress, such as deformation or cracking, which would compromise its
structural integrity and lessen its capacity to store and release lithium ions during cycles of
charging and discharging [57]. Wang et al. investigated the mechanical stress on the anode
and cathode and found cracks in both surface and cross-sectional areas [ 58], as shown
in Figure 4. This damage may cause the internal resistance to rise, which would lower
its overall performance and efficiency. Furthermore, mechanical stress could permit the
electrolyte to penetrate the anode material and start chemical reactions that eventually
weaken the anode and reduce battery capacity [ 50]. Moreover, internal short circuits
brought on by stress-induced dendritic formation—a process in which microscopic lithium
metal fibers protrude from the anode surface—can enter the separator and result in safety
hazards like thermal runaway, overheating, or even explosions [51–53,59]. As the particles
go through a phase transition, the intercalation of lithium ions into the anode may cause
sudden variations in volume [ 60,61]. As more lithium is added, the orientation of the
molecules shifts during a phase transition, producing distinct geometrical and electrical
features. This results in mechanical stress brought on by a volume shift, which can cause
contact loss with the composite electrode (CL), surface layer cracking (LLI and LAM),
and anode structural damage (LAM) [ 62]. Electrode porosity, which is necessary for
the electrolyte to reach the electrode’s bulk, may also decrease as a result of the active
material’s volume change [21,63]. Different modeling techniques of stress factors of lithium-
ion batteries have been presented in [ 64–67]. The hydrostatic stress of an anode can be
evaluated using the following equations [59,68]:
σ(h) = σ1 + σ2 + σ3
3 = σr + 2σc
3 = 2ΩE
9(1 − V) [ 3
R3
Z R
0
C(r)r2dr − C(r)] (8)

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 9 of 32
where the volume fluctuation of the intercalated lithium and solution host material is
described by the partial molar volume, or Ω. The particle’s lithium concentration field is
denoted by C. The Young modulus (E) and Poisson ratio (ν) are used, respectively.
Batteries 2024, 10, 220 9 of 34 
 
cause contact loss with the composite electr ode (CL), surface layer cracking (LLI and 
LAM), and anode structural damage (LAM) [ 62]. Electrode porosity, which is necessary 
for the electrolyte to reach the electrode’s bulk, may also decrease as a result of the active 
material’s volume change [21,63]. Different modeling techniques of stress factors of lith-
ium-ion batteries have been presented in [64 –67]. The hydrostatic stress of an anode can 
be evaluated using the following equations [59,68]: 
𝜎(ℎ) = 𝜎ଵ +𝜎 ଶ +𝜎 ଷ
3 = 𝜎௥ +2 𝜎௖
3 = 2Ω𝐸
9(1 − 𝑉)ሾ 3
𝑅ଷ න𝐶 (𝑟)𝑟ଶ𝑑𝑟 − 𝐶(𝑟)ሿ 
ோ
଴
 (8)
where the volume fluctuation of the intercalated lithium and solution host material is de-
scribed by the partial molar volume, or Ω. The particle’s lithium concentration field is 
denoted by C. The Young modulus (E) and Poisson ratio (𝜈) are used, respectively. 
 
Figure 4. Impact of stress in both anode and cathode of lithium-ion battery [58]. 
2.2. Degradation in Cathode 
Battery degradation in the cathode of lithium-ion batteries involves mechanisms 
such as transition metal dissolution, formatio n of surface layer film, stress, and particle 
cracking. These processes contribute to capacity loss, reduced cycling stability, decreased 
energy density, and decreased battery performance over time. 
2.2.1. Film on Cathode Surface Layer 
Surface layer films, sometimes called cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI) layers, can 
develop on the cathode owing to electrolyte oxidation and salt deposition, much like they 
can on the anode [69]. Using direct STEM (E ELS) measurements, Roy et al. investigated 
structural and compositional changes at the surfaces of 𝐿𝑖𝑀𝑛ଶ𝑂ସ epitaxial films at the 
atomic level [70]. The findings unequivocally demonstrate that O deficiency near the pure 
LiMn2O4 surface is linked to Li deficiency and a mean Mn oxidation state that is lower 
than predicted by the classical intercalation mechanism. A thin surface layer with an ap-
proximate 𝐿𝑖௫𝑀𝑛ଶ𝑂ସ௬  composition that fluctuates progressively down to a depth of 
around 15 nm is produced by this non-stoichiometry. When Li is removed, Jahn–Teller 
𝑀𝑛ଷାions oxidize to smaller 𝑀𝑛ସା ions, causing a decrease in lattice volume inside the 
film and a significant rise in strain on the surficial layer during the first charge. In this 
state, the highly strained surficial layer is unstable and reconstructs to create 𝑀𝑛
ଷ𝑂ସ at a 
depth of 2–3 nm with additional oxygen loss; during the first cycle, 𝑀𝑛ଶା dissolution 
and/or spallation of the strained selvedge cause a significant reduction in specific capacity. 
The cathode surface layer has poor lithium-ion conductivity, which raises the impedance, 
in contrast to the SEI layer. Additionally, gas evolution is conceivable [71]. Several mod-
eling techniques have been introduced by [72–75]. SEI film layer formation rate can be 
Figure 4. Impact of stress in both anode and cathode of lithium-ion battery [58].
2.2. Degradation in Cathode
Battery degradation in the cathode of lithium-ion batteries involves mechanisms such
as transition metal dissolution, formation of surface layer film, stress, and particle cracking.
These processes contribute to capacity loss, reduced cycling stability, decreased energy
density, and decreased battery performance over time.
2.2.1. Film on Cathode Surface Layer
Surface layer films, sometimes called cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI) layers, can
develop on the cathode owing to electrolyte oxidation and salt deposition, much like they
can on the anode [69]. Using direct STEM (EELS) measurements, Roy et al. investigated
structural and compositional changes at the surfaces of LixMn2O4y epitaxial films at the
atomic level [ 70]. The findings unequivocally demonstrate that O deficiency near the
pure LiMn2O4 surface is linked to Li deficiency and a mean Mn oxidation state that is
lower than predicted by the classical intercalation mechanism. A thin surface layer with
an approximate LiMn2O4 composition that fluctuates progressively down to a depth of
around 15 nm is produced by this non-stoichiometry. When Li is removed, Jahn–Teller
Mn3+ ions oxidize to smaller Mn 4+ ions, causing a decrease in lattice volume inside the
film and a significant rise in strain on the surficial layer during the first charge. In this state,
the highly strained surficial layer is unstable and reconstructs to create Mn3O4 at a depth
of 2–3 nm with additional oxygen loss; during the first cycle, Mn 2+ dissolution and/or
spallation of the strained selvedge cause a significant reduction in specific capacity. The
cathode surface layer has poor lithium-ion conductivity, which raises the impedance, in
contrast to the SEI layer. Additionally, gas evolution is conceivable [71]. Several modeling
techniques have been introduced by [72–75]. SEI film layer formation rate can be described
by Tafel equation [76]. The formation rate of the particle on site can be described by the
following equation:
Г f orm,i = K exp(− F
2RT ηs,i) (9)
where
K = Js,i0a0Na
2F (10)
ηs,i = ϕs,i − Us (11)
ϕs,i= ϕn −
 
Jn
kα
+ Js
kβ
!
δi
An
(12)

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 10 of 32
Here, ϕs,i is the potential site of I, and Us is the local equilibrium of SEI formation.
Kemeny et al. state that organic compounds produced at the anode by reduction may also
be carried to the cathode, where they undergo oxidation and deposit on the cathode surface
to produce LAM and LLI [60]. Similar conclusions were reached in [61]. Unfortunately, it is
more challenging to detect this surface film layer because of the greater cathode voltage.
2.2.2. Stress
Similar to the anode, the cathode may experience phase transitions that lead to LAM
and CL during the intercalation and deintercalation of Li ions. Depending on the chem-
istry, there are different amounts of volume changes. For instance, LFP cells only have a
two-phase regime with FePO 4 and LiFePO4 [64]. Different chemistries exhibit various
transitions of phase in the anode and cathode voltage profiles, such as NMC or NCA [65].
As a result, the shape transitions from cubic to tetragonal. This can raise the cathode
volume in the case of LMO by around 16% [66], producing more LAM [67]. Low SOC is
when the Jahn–Teller distortion happens. Capacity fading brought on the volume variation
can be lessened by adding dopants and adjusting the end-of-discharge voltage (EODV).
Kim and Huang performed an experimental study where it has been shown that under
high C-rate, the electrode is fully saturated in a shorter period of time and mechanical
stress dramatically increased in lithium intercalation areas which significantly increased
the capacity fade [77]. The stress of the lithium-ion battery can be modeled by the following
equations [78]:
δc
δt
+ ∇.Г = 0 (13)
where
Г = −D

∇c − Ωc
RT

∇σh (14)
σh = σ11 + σ22 + σ33
3 (15)
Here, σh is the hydrostatic stress.
2.2.3. Dissolution of Transition Metals
Transition metal oxides, such those based on manganese, nickel, and cobalt, are fre-
quently used as cathode materials in LIB [79]. These transition metal ions can dissolve into
the electrolyte during the battery’s repeated cycles of charging and discharging, especially
in extreme weather or at high temperatures. The development of soluble metal species
at the cathode contact is the result of side reactions that cause this dissolution [ 72]. The
transition metal ions that have been dissolved then go to the anode, where they may plate
and form metallic deposits known as “dendrites”. These dendrites have the ability to pierce
the separator, resulting in internal short circuits, lowering the battery’s total capacity and
jeopardizing the lithium-ion battery’s functionality and safety.LiPF6 salt is included in most
battery electrolytes [73]. These cells can produce hydrogen fluoride (HF) from impuri-
ties within the electrolyte during cycling and storage, especially at high cell voltages and
temperatures [74]. Liao et al. presented the oxidization carbonates at the Li xNi0.5Mn0.5O2
where the formation of HF usually includes the hydrolysis of LiPF 6 from the incidental
electrolyte water, as shown in Equation (16) [79].
LiPF6 − →LiF + PF6
H2O
− →PF3 + 2HF (16)
The synthesis of λ − MnO2 and the presence of HF have been coupled by Mikheenkova
et al. to explain Mn migration to the negative electrode, as demonstrated by
Equation (17) [75].

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 11 of 32
Li1−xMn2O4 + 2(1 − x)HF
− →
  3+x
4

λMn2O4 + (1 − x)LiF + (1 − x)H2O +
 
1 − x
2

MnF2
(17)
Mn2+ may migrate from the electrolyte to the negative electrode via this hypothesized
pathway. The Li(Ni0.5Mn0.3Co0.2)O2 mechanism has been expanded to incorporate high
cell voltage operation. This raises the electrolyte’s acidity. The resultant HF raises the
impedance and causes capacity fading by dissolving the transition metals and corroding
the cathode. It also contributes to various degradation processes in the anode and cathode.
First, structural deterioration of the cathode (LAM) due to metal dissolution might lower
the cathode’s capacity to insert lithium [79]. Moreover, upon dissolution, the metals may
migrate through the electrolyte and settle on the anode, where they will serve as catalysts
for the reductive breakdown event that produces the formation of the SEI layer [ 80].
Lastly, lithium metal dendrites (LLI and LAM) may develop on the deposited metals
as a result of the transition metals that are formed on the anode during this reductive
process. A serious safety issue arises from the possibility of internal short circuits caused
by these dendrites. Transition metal dissolution can be particularly harmful to spinel-
containing chemistries like LiMn2O4, since the degree of dissolution can be significantly
higher and cause more structural damage of the cathode (LAM) [ 81]. Transition metal
dissolution during the charging process is inevitable, but it may be minimized by lowering
the electrolyte’s impurity level, employing dopants, and utilizing protective coatings to
lessen direct contact between the cathode and the electrolyte [82]. Krupp et al. claim that at
potentials higher than 4.6 V , a significant increase in the rate of manganese dissolution was
observed. Regardless of the charge level, manganese deposits on the graphite electrode
were always in the oxidation state +2 while the system was in operation [83]. Transition
metal ion dissolution often occurs in the presence of acidic species in the electrolytes. It
is commonly known that LiPF 6 may include traces of hydrogen fluoride (HF), and that
HF can be produced when LiPF 6 combines with traces of water or alcohol in carbonate
solvents [84,85]. Degradation in cathode due to dissolution of transition materials has been
shown in Figure 5.
Batteries 2024, 10, 220 12 of 34 
 
 
Figure 5. Degradation mechanism in cathode due to transition material dissolution [82]. 
3. Key Degradation Factor 
Despite being popular and effective, lithium-ion batteries deteriorate over time for a 
number of reasons. Cycling, or the charge–discharge cycle that a battery experiences 
throughout its lifespan, is one important co mponent. Every cycle alters the composition 
of a battery physically and chemically, brea king down the electrode materials and form-
ing undesirable compounds that lower the ba ttery performance and capacity [86]. An-
other important degrading element is temperature. Higher temperatures hasten chemical 
processes in the battery, which speed up the deterioration of the electrolytes and electrode 
materials. In the same way, low temperature, SOC, DOD, and calendar aging also play a 
vital role in battery degradation. Reduced energy efficiency, capacity loss, and even safety 
risks like thermal runaway might result from this. 
3.1. Cycling Degradation 
Cycling degradation in lithium-ion batteries refers to the progressive deterioration in 
performance that occurs as the battery unde rgoes repeated charge and discharge cycles 
during its operational life [87]. With each cy cle, various physical and chemical processes 
contribute to the gradual degradation of th e battery components [88]. Mechanical stress 
resulting from the expansion and contraction of electrode materials, particularly in the 
anode, can lead to structural damage and decreased capacity [85]. Xu et al. presented an 
empirical model of degradation prediction of lithium-ion batteries and the authors also 
claim that five stress factors (temperature, DOD, charging C rate, discharging C rate, and 
middle SOC) have a great influence on the cycling aging [89]. Additionally, chemical re-
actions at the electrode–electrolyte interface can form a solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) 
layer, hindering ion transport and increasing internal resistance [90]. Wang et al. presents 
a post mortem study of a lithium-ion battery using neutron depth profiling (NDP) where 
it has been shown that SEI grow logarithmically with cycle number starting with the main 
formation of the initial cycle [71]. Transition metal dissolution from the cathode, electro-
lyte decomposition, and thermal effects further contribute to capacity fade and reduced 
overall efficiency [72]. Lee presented the impact of transition metal dissolution on cycling 
aging where 𝐿𝑖𝑀𝑛
ଶ𝑂ସ is used as transition metal [91]. In this study, 5, 50, and 500 ppm 
concentrations of Mn are dissolved in the el ectrolyte which is used as the input of the 
Figure 5. Degradation mechanism in cathode due to transition material dissolution [82].

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 12 of 32
3. Key Degradation Factor
Despite being popular and effective, lithium-ion batteries deteriorate over time for
a number of reasons. Cycling, or the charge–discharge cycle that a battery experiences
throughout its lifespan, is one important component. Every cycle alters the composition of
a battery physically and chemically, breaking down the electrode materials and forming
undesirable compounds that lower the battery performance and capacity [86]. Another im-
portant degrading element is temperature. Higher temperatures hasten chemical processes
in the battery, which speed up the deterioration of the electrolytes and electrode materials.
In the same way, low temperature, SOC, DOD, and calendar aging also play a vital role in
battery degradation. Reduced energy efficiency, capacity loss, and even safety risks like
thermal runaway might result from this.
3.1. Cycling Degradation
Cycling degradation in lithium-ion batteries refers to the progressive deterioration in
performance that occurs as the battery undergoes repeated charge and discharge cycles
during its operational life [87]. With each cycle, various physical and chemical processes
contribute to the gradual degradation of the battery components [88]. Mechanical stress
resulting from the expansion and contraction of electrode materials, particularly in the anode,
can lead to structural damage and decreased capacity [85]. Xu et al. presented an empirical
model of degradation prediction of lithium-ion batteries and the authors also claim that five
stress factors (temperature, DOD, charging C rate, discharging C rate, and middle SOC)
have a great influence on the cycling aging [ 89]. Additionally , chemical reactions at the
electrode–electrolyteinterface can form a solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) layer, hindering ion
transport and increasing internal resistance [90]. Wang et al. presents a post mortem study
of a lithium-ion battery using neutron depth profiling (NDP) where it has been shown that
SEI grow logarithmically with cycle number starting with the main formation of the initial
cycle [71]. Transition metal dissolution from the cathode, electrolyte decomposition, and
thermal effects further contribute to capacity fade and reduced overall efficiency [72]. Lee
presented the impact of transition metal dissolution on cycling aging where LiMn2O4 is used
as transition metal [91]. In this study , 5, 50, and 500 ppm concentrations of Mn are dissolved
in the electrolyte which is used as the input of the experiment and the results show that the
higher dissolution rate caused severe fraction and volume losses during the cycling.
Lithium-ion battery cycling deterioration results from a combination of chemical and
physical reactions that take place during repeated cycles of charging and discharging. The
mechanical stress that the electrode materials, particularly in the anode, endure during the
volume changes that occur during charging and discharging, is one of the main contributing
factors. The cycle deterioration of lithium-ion batteries is caused by the combined impacts of
mechanical, electrochemical, and thermal stressors [92]. This degradation affects the batteries’
capacity , energy retention, and overall performance throughout the course of their operational
lives. There are several models for estimating the cycling aging estimation [93–96]. Cycling
degradation can be estimated from the following equations:
LCyc = ∑
N
i ni fc(σi, δi, Tc,i) (18)
where N is the number of cycles, ni mentioned that i is a full cycle or half, δi is the depth
of discharge, σi is the average SOC of the cycle, and Tc,i is the average cell temperature.
The cycling aging problem of lithium-ion batteries can be mitigated by adopting different
techniques. Wood et al. present an aging level-based charging strategy which may slow
down the capacity fade by 3.84% and increase the life time by 40 cycles to 50 cycles [97].
3.2. Electrolyte Breakdown
Electrolyte breakdown is the chemical reaction and deterioration of the electrolyte. Re-
peated cycles, high temperatures, or overcharging are some of the reasons that might cause
this breakdown and result in the development of undesirable byproducts [98]. Increased
internal resistance, capacity decline, and decreased overall performance in lithium-ion

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 13 of 32
batteries are caused by electrolyte degradation [99]. The breakdown of the electrolyte, an
essential aspect that facilitates ion transport between the positive and negative electrodes
in lithium-ion batteries is a complicated process involving a variety of chemical and elec-
trochemical events that affect the electrolyte’s usefulness and stability. The creation of a
solid–electrolyte interface during the battery’s repeated cycles of charge and discharge is
one important factor [100]. Even while the SEI is necessary for a battery to function nor-
mally, its constant expansion can obstruct ion transport and cause electrolyte degradation.
Furthermore, high voltages can cause electrolyte breakdown, producing heat, gas, and
unwanted chemical species that exacerbate breakdown, particularly when overcharging or
at high temperatures.
Chemical reactions inside the electrolyte can be accelerated by thermal stress from
internal and external heat sources in combination with undesirable side reactions at
the electrode–electrolyte contact. Investigating low- and high-Ni content NMC using
single-solvent LiPF6-based electrolytes by Zhang et al. has revealed new information re-
garding the higher interfacial reactivity for charged Ni-rich NMC cathodes and the crucial
impact the electrolyte solvent plays [ 101]. This study reveals that there is an inherent
connection between the deterioration of the cathode surface and sub-surfaces and the
amount of lattice oxygen loss from NMC, which was shown to be dependent on both
the Ni-content and the electrolyte solvent. The number of charge–discharge cycles that
occur once a battery’s usable capacity drops to 80% of its initial value is known as the
cycle life. LIBs typically display two-phase capacity degradation behavior, which denotes
that the capacity first deteriorates slowly before experiencing an accelerated degrada-
tion that begins at a specific beginning point. This phase, which is sometimes referred
to as the knee point, is crucial to the cell cycle as a whole. The combination of internal
chemical reaction, external charging/discharging circumstances, and battery environment
affects the development of knee point [102]. Following this, the capacity will quickly drop
very significantly.
3.3. Temperature
Lithium-ion battery performance and deterioration are significantly influenced by
temperature. Temperature variations can have an effect on the electrochemical processes
taking place inside the battery, hence compromising its general health.
3.3.1. High Temperature
High temperatures have a significant impact on lithium-ion battery performance and
safety in a number of different ways. The battery’s chemical processes are accelerated by
elevated temperatures, which can be caused by external factors or internal heat produced
during cycles of charging and discharging. This involves the electrolyte breaking down
and an increase in electrode–electrolyte interface reactions, which increases the possibility
of thermal runaway. Furthermore, on electrode surfaces, high temperatures hasten the
creation and expansion of the solid–electrolyte interface. While the SEI is necessary for
battery operation, too much development can increase internal resistance and reduce the
efficiency of ion transport. Furthermore, the elevated temperature raises the possibility of
dendrite development, particularly in lithium metal anodes. LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4 cathode
capacity variation was investigated by Gao et al. [ 103]. Thermal aging was applied to
the LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4 cathodes for 10 and 6 days, respectively, at 75 ◦C. Following
age treatment, discharge patterns of these two cathodes demonstrated a significant loss
of capacity. Almeida et al. [104] examined the aging process of LIBs based on Li (Ni, Mn,
Co)O2 (NMC). The tested battery’s capacity lost 7.5% when it was cycled at 85 ◦C and 22%
when it was cycled at 120 ◦C. Two potential explanations for the aging deterioration were
presented by means of characterization techniques that allowed for the assessment of the
binder and SEI changes during the aging process. The anode surface had been moved to by
the polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder, which prevented the intercalation of lithium
ions. Conversely, at high temperatures, the carbonates species vanished, and the inorganic

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 14 of 32
species multiplied at the SEI layers, increasing the internal resistance of the batteries. Kalaga
et al. [105] examined the impact of temperature on the rate of capacity deterioration of a
Sony Prismatic LIB during aging from 25 ◦C to 55 ◦C using the electrochemistry-based
electrical (ECBE) model. Increasing the temperature within the measured range partly
boosted the battery’s capacity but also sped up the rate at which the capacity degraded
during cycling [106].
3.3.2. Low Temperature
Lithium-ion battery performance is significantly impacted by cold temperatures, pri-
marily impacting internal resistance and ion mobility. The mobility of lithium ions in the
battery is reduced in cold environments, which slows down electrochemical processes.
At a temperature of 0 or below that, lithium-ion batteries started to degrade [ 107]. Ac-
cording to Naga Subramanian, Panasonic 18,650 LIBs had power and energy densities of
about 800 W/L and 100 Wh/L at 25 ◦C. At −40 ◦C, these values decreased by 98.75% and
95% to less than 10 W/L and ~5 Wh/L. When the operating temperature dropped from
25 ◦C to −15 ◦C [103], it was also discovered that the state of charge (SOC) of a LIB, which
is defined as the ratio of the current residual capacity to the overall available capacity, re-
duced by almost 23% [104]. An improved electrolyte formulation of 1.0 M LiPF6 in ethylene
carbonate (EC)−propylene carbonate (PC)−ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC) (1:1:8 by wt)
with 0.05 M CsPF6 was also reported by Tang et al. [108]. For the batteries tested at −40 ◦C,
this formulation allowed for a capacity retention of 68%, whereas the batteries with the
standard formulation only demonstrated a 20% capacity retention. Lithium difluoro phos-
phate (LiPO2F2) is one particular electrolyte addition that has been shown to be useful in
enhancing LIB performance at low temperatures [109]. Another significant element that
plays a role in the performance reduction in LIB at low temperatures is the rise in charge-
transfer resistance. It has been observed that LiFePO4-based cathodes exhibit a three-fold
increase in charge-transfer resistance at −20 ◦C compared to ambient temperature [105].
Reduced capacity and power production result from slow ion movement, which is espe-
cially noticeable during discharge cycles. Furthermore, the battery’s internal resistance
increases in a cold environment, obstructing the free passage of ions [110]. Particularly in
scenarios with high demand, the higher internal resistance lowers overall efficiency and
causes voltage dips. Moreover, the electrolyte may partially solidify in extremely low tem-
peratures, which would impair its capacity to efficiently promote ion mobility [93,94]. The
battery’s performance is further hindered by this solidification, which eventually causes
capacity reduction.
Several temperature modeling techniques has been shown in [98,111,112]. The tem-
perature of the lithium-ion battery could be assumed from the simplified energy balance
which is shown in the following equation [93]:
qT = I.
 
V − Uavg

+ I.T δUavg
δT (19)
where, I is the cell current, V is the cell voltage, Uavg is the open circuit voltage, T is the
absolute temperature,
 
V − Uavg

is the cell over potential, I.
 
V − Uavg

is the polarization
heat, and I.T δUavg
δT is the reversible entropic heat.
3.4. Calendar Aging
The slow deterioration of a lithium-ion battery performance over time, even when it is
not in use, is known as calendar aging [25]. Calendar aging is related to time passing, as
opposed to cycle aging, which is caused by charging and discharging cycles [95]. Calendar
aging is greatly influenced by variables including temperature, charge level, and storage
circumstances. Keli et al. shows that calendar aging strongly depends on the graphite
electrode which is the main driver of capacity fade [ 25]. This study also revealed that
if the graphite anode lithiated more than 50%, the low anode potential will accelerate
the loss of cyclable lithium. As the battery ages, slow-moving chemical processes take

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 15 of 32
place inside it, forming solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) and other degradation products.
Alsagri et al. demonstrated that the loss of cycleable lithium as a result of SEI layer
formation is the primary cause of capacity decline during calendar aging [ 96]. When
compared to a fresh cell, this might explain the thermal behavior of the electrodes in
their older form. Because the previous state’s SEI layer is more prominent and undergoes
exothermic breakdown, the onset temperature is lowered. Simultaneously, the aged anode
releases a lot less total energy. This is because there is less intercalated lithium in the aged
anode’s charged state, which might react with the electrolyte during the thermal tests. This
procedure may cause the battery’s capacity to decrease, its internal resistance to rise, and
its overall performance to decline [ 113]. However, because the old cathode’s potential
in the charged state remains unchanged, the aged cathode/electrolyte process does not
exhibit any appreciable divergence from its thermal behavior. The aged lithium-ion cell’s
somewhat higher heating rate over 200 C can be attributed to the cathode’s larger surface
area. Increased internal resistance is a result of the solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer
on the electrode surfaces forming and rebuilding over time.
The degradation of active materials in batteries is caused by unwanted side reactions,
which have an adverse effect on the battery’s overall performance. The effective surface
area for electrochemical reactions can be decreased and the battery’s capacity affected by the
agglomeration and development of active material particles as well as lithium plating on the
anode under specific circumstances [114,115]. Since these aging processes are accelerated
by elevated temperatures, temperature regulation is essential for reducing calendar aging.
Manufacturers concentrate on developing efficient electrolytes, optimizing battery materials,
and putting in place cutting-edge battery management systems in order to overcome these
obstacles and increase the longevity and functionality of lithium-ion batteries [116]. Several
calendar aging modeling techniques have been shown in [117–120]. Suri et al. presented a brief
review about the electrochemical, semi-empirical, and data-driven models [121]. Calendar
aging of lithium-ion battery can be explained by the Arrhenius equation [121].
Qloss = f (SOC)exp

−Ea
(SOC)
RTs

.tz (20)
where, both f (SOC) and Ea(SOC) are the SOC dependent terms, R is the gas constant, and
z is the power law parameter used to denote the dependence of time parameters.
3.5. State of Charge
In lithium-ion batteries, battery degradation due to SOC is the result of keeping the
battery at a certain charge level for lengthy periods of time, either high or low. This
causes the general health of battery to gradually deteriorate. Long-term full-charge times
(high SOC) can lead to the production of unwanted byproducts such the solid–electrolyte
interphase (SEI) layer on the electrode surfaces. The ongoing development of this layer
may raise internal resistance, restricting the movement of ions and electrons within the
battery and eventually lowering its capacity. However, persistently using the battery at low
SOC levels may cause lithium plating, or the accumulation of lithium metal on the anode.
Bui et al. performed an experimental investigation on five cells subjected to calendar aging
for 12 months and the results indicate that the worst calendar aging conditions are 45 ◦C
and 50% SOC [122]. The SOC gradually increases with continuous voltage charging until
the battery is almost at capacity. When the voltage is maintained during charging, the SOC
rises until it reaches almost full charge, at which point the voltage is kept constant while
the SOC moves closer to saturation. Guena et al. found that 90% of the cycling degradation
occurs due to the constant voltage [123]. There is a strong relationship between SOC and
battery degradation. Many studies find that increasing degradation can be seen in the
lower SOC [124–126]. This can be explained by the fact that when the cell discharges the
impedance of the cell will be increased, which results in more self-heating and reduces
power capabilities. Lin et al. presented the effect of minimum SOC on a battery at 30 ◦C
with 25–45% minimum SOC and the results show an exponential increase in degradation

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 16 of 32
at higher SOC [127]. However, in [128], a negligible degradation is found with higher SOC
cycled with a C rate of 10 C. The authors used the Arrhenius equation for modeling which
is given below.
Qloss = (αSOC + β)exp −Ea + ηI
R9273.15 + T Ah2 (21)
The safety and capacity of the battery are adversely affected by lithium plating. There
are several charging strategies which may mitigate this degradation. Wright et al. proposed
a state-of-charge pre-conditioning model and this method does not accelerate the battery
degradation and was also able to mitigate battery degradation by 7.3% to 26.7% for the first
100 days of operation [111].
3.6. Depth of Discharge
The depth of discharge in a lithium-ion battery is the proportion of its total capac-
ity that has been utilized during a single discharge cycle, expressed as a percentage.
For instance, if a battery with a capacity of 100 ampere-hours has been discharged by
50 ampere-hours, the DOD is 50%. The monitoring and managing of DOD are critical for
optimizing the performance and lifespan of lithium-ion batteries. Generally, shallower
discharges (lower DOD) contribute to extended battery life, and battery management sys-
tems often regulate DOD to strike a balance between maximizing energy storage capacity
and preserving the longevity of the battery. Many studies found that an increasing DOD
reduces the cycle life of a lithium-ion battery, which triggers the fast degradation of the
lithium-ion battery [129–131]. Guana and Lebnac presented an experimental investigation
on the effect of DOD on the battery cycle life of a lithium-ion battery and the results indicate
that that increased DOD reduces the cycle life and increases the capacity fade, which is
closely related to battery degradation [112]. This study also found that over a four-month
period, microcycling at a capacity of 0.6% did not result in any performance impairment.
Thirty-two full cycles were completed at this time. Furthermore, about sixteen thousand
0.6% microdischarges were carried out.
Effective DOD management is essential in various applications, including electric
vehicles and portable electronics. Deep discharge cycles increase the risk of lithium plating
forming on the anode of a battery, which can result in dendrite formation and risk its
capacity and safety. Deeper discharge cycles also put more stress on the active materials
in the electrode, which can lead to chemical and physical changes such as cracking and
electrode structural degradation. Youksek and Alkaya illustrated a complex relationship
between DOD and battery degradation [112]. The authors claim that battery degradation
and lifetime is directly impacted by DOD. Higher DoD levels, which are indicative of
deeper discharges, put the battery under more stress throughout each charge–discharge
cycle. Increased mechanical stress, heat production, chemical reactions, capacity fading,
and shorter cycle life are all caused by this increased stress. Many studies claimed that
DOD can be modeled based on the Wohler curve and according to their findings, model
degradation is exponentially dependent on the DOD. The equations are as follows [112]:
CL(DOD) = aeb.DOD + ced.DOD (22)
where,CL(DOD) is the cycle life as a function of DOD anda, b, c, d are the curve fit parameters.
Increased internal resistance is a result of the solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer on
the electrode surfaces repeatedly forming and reconstructing during discharge and recharge
cycles, especially at high DOD [32]. This eventually results in decreased performance as
the battery’s ability to transport ions is diminished [132]. Deeper discharges also increase
the battery’s temperature, which speeds up chemical reactions and encourages degradation
processes. Tables 2–4 shows the impact of DOD on battery life cycle, comparison of
performance parameter of different types of lithium ion battery and Cycle life of different
kinds of lithium-ion batteries respectively.

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 17 of 32
Table 2. Impact of DOD on the cycle and the lifetime of lithium-ion battery [112].
DOD Number of Cycle
to Date
Number of
Full Discharge
to Date
Cumulative
Discharge Capacity to
Date
Expected Number of
Cycle to Reach EOL
Equivalent Number
of Full Cycle to Reach
EOL
50% 407 15 11,760 Ah 1300 650
60% 351 13 11,930 Ah 680 400
70% 305 12 11,820 Ah 680 400
80% 276 10 12,380 Ah 300 240
90% 110 10 5600 Ah 300 250
100% 60 60 3030 Ah 180 150
Table 3. Comparison of the performance parameters of the different types of batteries [133].
Parameters Lead-Acid Ni-Cd Ni-MH Lithium-Ion
Energy density(W/kg) 30–50 45–80 60–120 110–160
Power density 180 150 250–100 1800
Nominal voltage 2 V 1.25 V 1.25 V 3.6 V
Overcharge tolerance High Moderate Low Very Low
Self-discharge Low Moderate High Very Low
Operating temperature −20–60 ◦C −40–60 ◦C −20–60 ◦C −20–60 ◦C
Cycle life 200–300 1500 300–500 500–1000
Table 4. Cycle life of different kinds of lithium-ion batteries.
Reference Battery Type Factors Temperature DOD SOC C-Rate Throughput
[117] LFP SOC, DOD, C, T 25–40 ◦C 12.5–75% 30–70% 1–1.82 900 FEC
[134] NMC SOC, DOD, C, T −10–50 ◦C 10–100% 20–80% 1/3–2 900–1 K FEC
[135] LMO SOC, DOD, T 20 ◦C 50–75% 75–100% 1 4 k–8 k FEC
[136] NCA T, C 40–50 ◦C 20–65% 60–85% 18 4 K FEC
[118] LCO SOC, DOD, T 0–60 ◦C 3–80% 0–100% 1/5 10 k FEC
4. Key Effect of Battery Degradation on EVs and Energy Storage Systems
Battery degradation poses significant challenges for energy storage systems, impacting
their overall efficiency and performance. Over time, the gradual loss of capacity in batteries
reduces the system’s ability to store and deliver the expected amount of energy. This
capacity loss, coupled with increased internal resistance and voltage fade, leads to decreased
energy density and efficiency. As a result, energy storage systems experience a shortened
cycle life, reduced power output, and increased maintenance costs.
4.1. Capacity Fade
The steady decline in a battery’s capacity to store and release energy over time is
referred to as capacity fade in battery energy storage systems (BESS). This phenomenon
is especially important for rechargeable batteries used in energy storage systems, grid
storage, and electric vehicles, among other applications. Numerous reasons contribute to
degradation, including the impact of high operating temperatures, structural changes in
electrodes, unintentional side reactions producing byproducts that interfere with normal
functioning, and chemical and electrochemical processes during charge and discharge
cycles [31,137]. The amount of regular charge and discharge cycles, or cycling depth, in
addition to the charge level, might affect how quickly capacity fades.
Battery degradation affects each battery cell in the battery energy storage system
(BESS), which in turn causes capacity fading throughout the system. Waldmann et al.
estimated an 18% capacity fade in lithium Li0.89NiCoO2 during the first charge discharge
cycle [44]. Generally, BESS is made up of multiple interconnected batteries, and the system’s
total performance and storage capacity are impacted by the individual cells’ deterioration

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 18 of 32
combined. The interior components of a battery cell gradually change as a result of the
chemical and electrochemical processes that occur during charge and discharge cycles.
Within individual cells, accumulation of byproducts takes place, such as the development
of solid–electrolyte interfaces (SEI) or dendritic growth [119]. Li et al. said that the SEI layer
growth is the major contributor of the capacity fade of a lithium-ion battery [ 120]. This
study also found that after 1000 cycles, 4.45% and 4.46% capacity fade has been observed
for the regenerative and non-regenerative cases, respectively. The ability of each cell to
store energy decreases as a result of this degeneration. Temperature has a great impact
on the capacity fading of a lithium-ion battery. Lam and Bauer investigated capacity fade
at different temperatures such as −20 ◦C, 0 ◦C, 25 ◦C, and 40 ◦C and the results of this
temperature stress factor study excluded the cell that cycled at −20 ◦C due to extreme
capacity fading, which made it impossible to define the rate of fading. The total effect of
several cells experiencing capacity fade is a decrease in the BESS’s capacity to store and
distribute energy. Degraded capacity cells may not contribute as efficiently to the system’s
overall energy production, which might result in decreased system dependability and
overall performance [124,138]. Various models used to estimate capacity fade have been
found in different studies [25,139,140]. Wood et al. used the following equation to estimate
the capacity fade of the lithium-ion battery [97]:
Q = a.exp(b.k) + c.exp(d.k) (23)
where Q is the battery capacity, K is the number of cycles, a and b is the constant related
to the internal impedance and c and d indicate the aging rate. Figure 6 illustrates a cross-
sectional view of a lithium-ion battery.
Batteries 2024, 10, 220 19 of 34 
 
where Q is the battery capacity, K is the number of cycles, a and b is the constant related 
to the internal impedance and c and d indicate the aging rate. Figure 6 illustrates a cross-
sectional view of a lithium-ion battery. 
 
Figure 6. Cross-sectional image of capacity fade of lithium-ion battery, ( a) fresh, (b) 1000, (c) 2000, 
and (d) 3000 cycles [119]. 
4.2. Reduction in Energy Density 
A battery may only go through a certain nu mber of charge and discharge cycles be-
fore its capacity decreases to a certain point [125,126]. This is known as the limited cycle 
life of a battery energy storage system, or BESS. As it establishes the maximum number of 
times a battery may be charged and discharged without compromising performance, cy-
cle life is an important aspect of energy storage systems’ efficacy and lifespan [124]. The 
cycle life of a battery is frequently shorten ed by internal processes that take place with 
each cycle, including mechanical deterioration, heat stress, and chemical and electrochem-
ical reactions [141]. The ability of a BESS to supply energy storage consistently and stead-
ily over an extended length of time is impact ed as its overall efficacy and reliability are 
undermined as its cycle life shortens. Tröltzsch, et al. investigated the efficiency degrada-
tion of two types of lithium cell: NMC and LFP, which are affected by the calendar aging, 
[142]. Comparison of efficiency degradation of NMC and LFP have shown in Figure 7. In 
this study, the cells are experimented in 60 °C and 100% SOC, where it has been observed 
that after 190 days, the overall efficiency of the cell is reduced by 9% for the NMC and 1% 
for the LFP cell, and the capacity fade reached 37%. The composition and arrangement of 
the batteries’ active components vary as a result of chemical processes that occur through-
out each cycle of charging and discharging. The slow deterioration of the battery cells can 
be accelerated by this aging process, which ca n frequently be accele rated by factors like 
temperature changes and cycling depth [143]. Gradually, the accumulation of aging ef-
fects in individual cells reduces the BESS’s overall capacity to store energy. The aging 
process of the overall energy storage system is accelerated by the growth of dendrites, the 
formation of solid–electrolyte interfaces, and thermal stress. 
Figure 6. Cross-sectional image of capacity fade of lithium-ion battery, (a) fresh, (b) 1000, (c) 2000,
and (d) 3000 cycles [119].
4.2. Reduction in Energy Density
A battery may only go through a certain number of charge and discharge cycles before
its capacity decreases to a certain point [125,126]. This is known as the limited cycle life of
a battery energy storage system, or BESS. As it establishes the maximum number of times
a battery may be charged and discharged without compromising performance, cycle life
is an important aspect of energy storage systems’ efficacy and lifespan [ 124]. The cycle

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 19 of 32
life of a battery is frequently shortened by internal processes that take place with each
cycle, including mechanical deterioration, heat stress, and chemical and electrochemical
reactions [141]. The ability of a BESS to supply energy storage consistently and steadily over
an extended length of time is impacted as its overall efficacy and reliability are undermined
as its cycle life shortens. Tröltzsch, et al. investigated the efficiency degradation of two types
of lithium cell: NMC and LFP , which are affected by the calendar aging, [142]. Comparison
of efficiency degradation of NMC and LFP have shown in Figure 7. In this study, the cells
are experimented in 60 ◦C and 100% SOC, where it has been observed that after 190 days,
the overall efficiency of the cell is reduced by 9% for the NMC and 1% for the LFP cell, and
the capacity fade reached 37%. The composition and arrangement of the batteries’ active
components vary as a result of chemical processes that occur throughout each cycle of
charging and discharging. The slow deterioration of the battery cells can be accelerated by
this aging process, which can frequently be accelerated by factors like temperature changes
and cycling depth [143]. Gradually, the accumulation of aging effects in individual cells
reduces the BESS’s overall capacity to store energy. The aging process of the overall energy
storage system is accelerated by the growth of dendrites, the formation of solid–electrolyte
interfaces, and thermal stress.
Batteries 2024, 10, 220 20 of 34 
 
 
Figure 7. Efficiency degradation of lithium-ion cell due to calendar aging of (a) NMC and (b) LFP 
[124]. 
4.3. Increase in Internal Resistance 
The performance of a battery energy storage system (BESS) can be greatly impacted 
by increased internal resistance, which can result from a number of different causes. This 
increase in resistance is frequently the result of the battery aging and degrading, a process 
that is sped up by frequent cycles of charge and discharge. Battery degradation also affects 
EV batteries. Fanoro et al. finds great fluctuations in voltage and increasing internal re-
sistance of EV batteries for lithium polymer batteries which are comparatively higher 
them any other batteries [129]. The observed rise  in internal resistance is attributed to a 
number of factors, including the creation of solid–electrolyte interfaces (SEI), high operat-
ing temperatures, cycling depth, and dendritic growth in some chemistries, such as lith-
ium-ion batteries. Increased internal resistance has a variety of effects. Yang et al. claimed 
that internal resistance increased mostly at 82% of SOH for an EV battery [130]. Because 
more energy is lost in the battery during operation, the BESS’s overall efficiency is de-
creased. Voltage stability is also impacted by  a voltage drop across the battery terminals 
during high-current applications. The heat produced by the resistance presents problems 
for thermal control and may hasten the deterioration process. 
An increasing amount of internal resistance frequently results in capacity fade, which 
is characterized by a progressive decrease in the BESS’s ability to store energy [131]. The 
internal resistance of the lithium ion can be estimated by the following equations [144]: 
Figure 7. Efficiency degradation of lithium-ion cell due to calendar aging of ( a) NMC
and (b) LFP [124].

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 20 of 32
4.3. Increase in Internal Resistance
The performance of a battery energy storage system (BESS) can be greatly impacted
by increased internal resistance, which can result from a number of different causes. This
increase in resistance is frequently the result of the battery aging and degrading, a process
that is sped up by frequent cycles of charge and discharge. Battery degradation also affects
EV batteries. Fanoro et al. finds great fluctuations in voltage and increasing internal
resistance of EV batteries for lithium polymer batteries which are comparatively higher
them any other batteries [129]. The observed rise in internal resistance is attributed to a
number of factors, including the creation of solid–electrolyte interfaces (SEI), high operating
temperatures, cycling depth, and dendritic growth in some chemistries, such as lithium-ion
batteries. Increased internal resistance has a variety of effects. Yang et al. claimed that
internal resistance increased mostly at 82% of SOH for an EV battery [130]. Because more
energy is lost in the battery during operation, the BESS’s overall efficiency is decreased.
Voltage stability is also impacted by a voltage drop across the battery terminals during
high-current applications. The heat produced by the resistance presents problems for
thermal control and may hasten the deterioration process.
An increasing amount of internal resistance frequently results in capacity fade, which
is characterized by a progressive decrease in the BESS’s ability to store energy [131]. The
internal resistance of the lithium ion can be estimated by the following equations [144]:
(
Batteries 2024, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 21 of 34 
 
൜  𝑥ු௘ේ  = 𝐴௘𝑥ු௘ +𝐵 ௘𝑢+𝐿 ௘(𝑦 − 𝑦ු)
𝑦ු= 𝑓௘(𝑥ු௘,𝑢 )  (24)
𝑓௘(𝑥ු௘,𝑢 ) =𝑉௢௖(𝑧̌) −𝑉ଵෙ −𝑉ଶේ −𝑅 ௦ේ𝑢 (25)
When the extended state estimation 𝑅௦ is multiplied by the input 𝑢, and it might 
make fine-tuning the feedback gain 𝐿௘  more challenging, 𝐿௘  represents the extended 
state’s dynamics. 
4.4. Reduction in Overall Efficiency 
Through several interconnected factors, battery degradation poses a serious threat to 
a battery energy storage system’s overall efficiency. In an experimental study Kassem et 
al. showed a complex relationship between degradation and efficiency [145]. Authors ex-
perimented with two different types of lithium-ion batteries; NMC and LFP batteries 
where it has been shown that NMC and LFP cells age differently from one another. While 
the degradation curves of NMC cells show a two-phase concave degradation tendency, 
those of LFP cells exhibit a typical convex form. However, in both cases, loss of active 
material not only reduces lithium inventory but also quickens battery deterioration and 
lowers columbic efficiency (CE) values which leads to an overall efficiency reduction. The 
increase in internal resistance that occurs because of aging, chemical changes, and thermal 
stress during charge and discharge cycles is one important component. Because more en-
ergy is lost as heat as a result of this increased internal resistance, the overall efficiency of 
the battery is decreased. 
Battery degradation also impacts on the overall efficiency of EVs. Table 3 presents a 
summary of the performance parameters of different types of lithium-ion battery. Darma 
et al. claimed that battery degradation decreases the travel range of EVs which leads to a 
decrease in the overall efficiency of EVs [146]. Another aspect of deterioration is capacity 
fade, which over time reduces the battery’s capacity to store and distribute energy and 
has an immediate effect on the BESS’s energy efficiency [9,147]. Older batteries may also 
have reduced energy retention, faster rates of self-discharge, and less stored energy acces-
sible for use when needed [139,140]. Voltag e instabilities, stemming from degradation-
induced fluctuations, further undermine the efficiency of power conversion systems 
within the BESS [148,149]. Moreover, increased heat generation during degradation pro-
cesses contributes to thermal stress, exacerbating efficiency losses. An analysis applies the 
state-level operation condition to the EV energy operation model by considering the bat-
tery degradation effect on mid-size EVs with a 24 kWh lithium-ion manganese oxide 
(LMO) battery pack in order to investigate th e impacts of battery degradation on the en-
ergy consumption and GHG emissions of EVs in the USA. According to the study, due to 
a 10-year battery deterioration, the unit energy consumption and GHG emission increases 
vary from 29.2 Wh/km in Alaska to 127.4 Wh/km in Mississippi, and 0.2 g CO
2/km in Ver-
mont to 56.9 g CO2/km in Indiana, respectively [137,150,151]. A summary of the impact of 
degradation factors on lithium-ion batteries has been presented in Table 5 [152]. 
Table 5. Impact of degradation factors on battery anode and cathode. 
Degradation Factor Affected Battery 
Parts Effects Reference 
High Temperature Anode 
1. Decomposition of the blinder causes mechanical 
instability. 
2. Increased SEI layer and reduced accessible sur-
face area as a result of SEI. 
3. Decomposition of the electrolyte yielding the cy-
cleable lithium ion and further SEI development. 
[28,93,124,153,154] 
ˇy = fe( ˇxe, u)
(24)
fe( ˇxe, u) = Voc( ˇz) − ˇV1 − ˇV2 − ˇRsu (25)
When the extended state estimation Rs is multiplied by the input u, and it might
make fine-tuning the feedback gain Le more challenging, Le represents the extended state’s
dynamics.
4.4. Reduction in Overall Efficiency
Through several interconnected factors, battery degradation poses a serious threat
to a battery energy storage system’s overall efficiency. In an experimental study Kassem
et al. showed a complex relationship between degradation and efficiency [145]. Authors
experimented with two different types of lithium-ion batteries; NMC and LFP batteries
where it has been shown that NMC and LFP cells age differently from one another. While
the degradation curves of NMC cells show a two-phase concave degradation tendency,
those of LFP cells exhibit a typical convex form. However, in both cases, loss of active
material not only reduces lithium inventory but also quickens battery deterioration and
lowers columbic efficiency (CE) values which leads to an overall efficiency reduction. The
increase in internal resistance that occurs because of aging, chemical changes, and thermal
stress during charge and discharge cycles is one important component. Because more
energy is lost as heat as a result of this increased internal resistance, the overall efficiency of
the battery is decreased.
Battery degradation also impacts on the overall efficiency of EVs. Table 3 presents a
summary of the performance parameters of different types of lithium-ion battery. Darma
et al. claimed that battery degradation decreases the travel range of EVs which leads to a
decrease in the overall efficiency of EVs [146]. Another aspect of deterioration is capacity
fade, which over time reduces the battery’s capacity to store and distribute energy and has
an immediate effect on the BESS’s energy efficiency [9,147]. Older batteries may also have
reduced energy retention, faster rates of self-discharge, and less stored energy accessible
for use when needed [139,140]. Voltage instabilities, stemming from degradation-induced
fluctuations, further undermine the efficiency of power conversion systems within the
BESS [148,149]. Moreover, increased heat generation during degradation processes con-
tributes to thermal stress, exacerbating efficiency losses. An analysis applies the state-level
operation condition to the EV energy operation model by considering the battery degrada-

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 21 of 32
tion effect on mid-size EVs with a 24 kWh lithium-ion manganese oxide (LMO) battery pack
in order to investigate the impacts of battery degradation on the energy consumption and
GHG emissions of EVs in the USA. According to the study, due to a 10-year battery deterio-
ration, the unit energy consumption and GHG emission increases vary from 29.2 Wh/km
in Alaska to 127.4 Wh/km in Mississippi, and 0.2 g CO2/km in Vermont to 56.9 g CO2/km
in Indiana, respectively [137,150,151]. A summary of the impact of degradation factors on
lithium-ion batteries has been presented in Table 5 [152].
Table 5. Impact of degradation factors on battery anode and cathode.
Degradation Factor Affected Battery Parts Effects Reference
High Temperature
Anode
1. Decomposition of the blinder causes
mechanical instability.
2. Increased SEI layer and reduced accessible
surface area as a result of SEI.
3. Decomposition of the electrolyte yielding
the cycleable lithium ion and further SEI
development.
4. Phase change brought on by material
dissolution in an active material.
[28,93,124,153,154]
Cathode
1. Elevation in phase transitions within
active materials.
2. Gas evolution and loss of cycleable lithium
as a result of electrolyte oxidation.
3. Blinder decomposition.
[144,155]
Low Temperature Anode Lithium plating at high SOC during
charging. [43,129,156]
Depth of Discharge (DOD) Both anode and Cathode
1. Fragmentation brought on by mechanical
stress.
2. Because of the value change while cycling,
it comes into contact with the LAM particle.
[157–159]
High SOC
Anode Lithium plating at high charging rates. [158,160]
Cathode Current collector corrosion.
Both Anode and Cathode 1. Electrolyte decomposition.
2. Formation of blinders.
Low SOC
Anode Current collector corrosion. [161,162]
Cathode Transition metal dissolution.
Both Anode and Cathode 1. Electrolyte decomposition
2. Formation of blinders.
Calendar Aging
Anode
1. Due to calendar aging, anode material
degraded which results in capacity fade.
2. Increase internal resistance.
3. Capacity fade.
[135,163]
Cathode
1. Increase in voltage irreversibility.
2. Degradation of electrolyte compatibility.
3. Changes in the cathode material which
results the cracking, phase transition, and
formation of surface film.
[152,164]
5. Data-Driven Approaches for Estimation of Battery Degradation
5.1. Support Vector Machines (SVM)
Battery deterioration is predicted using a machine learning approach called support
vector machines (SVM). SVM models anticipate the degree of battery degradation or
estimate the battery’s remaining usable life by using historical data and battery performance

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 22 of 32
characteristics, including voltage, current, temperature, and cycle count [ 165]. SVMs
function by determining the best hyperplane with the largest margin that divides data
points from several classes or regression objectives. With kernel functions, they provide
robustness against overfitting, efficiency in high-dimensional areas, and the capacity to
manage nonlinear interactions [166]. Li et al. presented a novel SVM-based technique for
battery degradation prediction by RUL and the results indicate that the proposed model
is 99.89% accurate and RMSE is 0.11% [153]. Chen et al. proposed a capacity degradation
prediction model for a lithium-ion battery based on SVMs and the authors claimed that
the artificial bee colony and support vector regression model can predict more accurately
compared to other state-of-the-art algorithms [165].
5.2. Relevance Vector Machines (RVM)
Battery degradation prediction using relevance vector machines (RVMs) is a machine
learning technique that leverages historical data and pertinent characteristics taken from
battery performance indicators to estimate battery deterioration and remaining usable
life. Support vector machines (SVM) and Relevance vector machine (RVMs) function
similarly; however, RVMs’ probabilistic structure and their sparsity of model parameters are
different. With benefits including automated feature selection and prediction uncertainty
calculation, RVMs seek to identify the most pertinent data points (vectors) to forecast battery
deterioration [154]. Cong et al. proposed a hybrid model (Broad Leaning–Relevance Vector
Machine) for RUL prediction of lithium-ion batteries and the results indicate that the
proposed model has higher accuracy and strong long-term predictive capability [ 167].
This study also revealed that the RMSE of the model is 0.01. In another study, Nash et al.
proposed another hybrid model to predict the RUL of a battery, where the authors showed
the model has a relative prediction error of 3.3% and 3.21%, respectively, for two unseen
datasets [168].
5.3. Gaussian Process Regression (GPR)
Modeling the link between input parameters and degradation levels, Gaussian Process
Regression (GPR) is a machine learning approach used to forecast battery deterioration.
GPR is capable of estimating the output’s mean and variance at every given input point
since it is predicated on the idea that the output data have a Gaussian distribution [169].
GPR forecasts the degree of deterioration and calculates the battery’s remaining usable
life by utilizing past data on battery performance characteristics, such as voltage, current,
temperature, and cycle count. Chinomona et al. presented a GPR-based battery degradation
diagnosis model for lithium-ion battery [170]. This study reveals that the use of an aging
dataset, C rates variation data, temperature, and user profiles leads to higher prediction
accuracy. This model had a mean absolute error of less than 0.1 and a coefficient of
determinant greater than 0.9. In another study, Sengupta et al. proposed a GPR-based
hybrid model of battery capacity degradation [171]. The mean absolute percentage errors
of predicted battery capacity degradation were less than 0.4%.
5.4. Deep Learning
By using neural network architectures, most often deep neural networks (DNN), deep
learning is used to estimate battery deterioration and remaining usable life based on past
data as well as several performance characteristics. Depending on the unique features
of the battery degradation data, these models might be convolutional neural networks
(CNN), recurrent neural networks (RNNs), or mixtures of the two. Nutakki et al. presented
a review of the different deep learning techniques of different degradation prediction
models [172]. Compared to the other degradation models, the deep learning method
showed higher prediction accuracy which is 90%. Using a typical long short-term memory
(LSTM) model, May et al. [156] created a technique for estimating the remaining useful life
(RUL) of lithium-ion batteries. The study used a systematic sampling strategy to efficiently
gather battery data features from many metrics and provide a full 31-dimensional dataset.

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 23 of 32
Pang et al. [157] trained the LSTM model with the 18 characteristics that were obtained
using a statistical sampling technique. Almuhaylan et al. proposed a model for battery
degradation trajectory prediction and the model shows that with normal data, the lifetime
median prediction error is 1.1%, while with noisy data, it is 1.3% [158].
5.4.1. Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
The modeling of battery deterioration made possible by artificial neural networks
(ANN) is a strong foundation for forecasting battery health and remaining usability. Ar-
tificial neural networks can efficiently learn complicated correlations between several
parameters, including voltage, current, temperature, and cycle count, by gathering and
preprocessing data from battery-monitoring systems or experiments [159,160]. The main
components of a simple artificial neural network model are usually one input layer, one
hidden layer, and one output layer. The input layer receives input data initially, processes
them, forwards them to the hidden layer, and then the output layer generates results [161].
Jafari et al. presented a new ANN-based model to predict the degradation of lithium-ion
battery [162]. The results indicate that the new model showed robustness against varying
temperature and varying loads [ 163]. Lu et al. proposed a novel ANN-based battery
degradation prediction model for lithium-ion batteries and the authors claimed that the
proposed model is able predict battery degradation with 5.9% error [173].
5.4.2. Long Short-Term Memory Neural Network
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) with long short-term memory (LSTM) architecture
are particularly good at modeling sequential input and capturing long-term relationships.
Based on past performance data, LSTM networks are used in the context of battery degra-
dation prediction to anticipate the deterioration and remaining usable life of batteries.
Because LSTM networks are capable of capturing temporal patterns and dependencies
in the behavior of the battery over time, including voltage profiles, current fluctuations,
temperature changes, and cycle counts, they are a good fit for this purpose. LSTM net-
works may learn intricate correlations and accurately estimate future deterioration levels or
remaining lifespan by examining sequential data. Ren et al. presents a CNN-LSTM model
and the model achieved 99.6% accuracy in partial discharge voltage and its prediction error
is greater than 99% for capacity estimation prediction [174].
5.4.3. Gated Recurrent Unit Neural Network
Sequential data modeling is a strong fit for the gated recurrent unit (GRU) kind of
recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture. GRU networks are used in the context of
battery degradation prediction in order to anticipate the deterioration process and calculate
the batteries’ remaining usable life based on past performance data [ 175]. Because they
can record long-term dependencies and temporal patterns in the battery’s activity over
time, such as voltage swings, current profiles, temperature changes, and cycle counts,
GRU networks are especially well suited for this purpose. GRU networks may discover
complex correlations and forecast future battery degradation levels or remaining lifespan
by examining sequential data [ 176]. Haris et al. presented a case study about a battery
degradation prediction model based on recurrent neural network, where 77 commercial
batteries are used as test sample [177]. The experimental results showed that the median
root means square error of this model were 2.4% for the NMC/graphite batteries and 2.3%
for LFP/graphite batteries, using only 3.8% of data regarding the whole battery life.
5.4.4. Convolution Neural Network
The capabilities of CNN architectures—which were first created for image processing
tasks—are utilized by convolutional neural networks (CNN) for battery deterioration
prediction, which analyzes sequential battery performance data. CNNs are used in this
context to extract pertinent characteristics from the input data, which usually consist
of time-series data like voltage, current, temperature, and cycle count [ 52]. CNNs are

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 24 of 32
able to extract both spatial and temporal patterns from the battery performance data by
utilizing convolutional layers. These patterns could be an indication of usage patterns,
deterioration tendencies, or other elements affecting battery health. CNNs can forecast
future deterioration levels or calculate the amount of battery life left by using existing
data. A convolution neural network-based model has been presented in [175] for battery
degradation diagnosis and prediction, and the results illustrate that the root mean square
error is around 2% for 100 duty cycles, which is 2.64% to 7.27% better than the other
algorithms. In another study, a degradation curve prediction model for lithium-ion batteries
has been presented [174]. This study shows that the proposed model is successfully able
to predict the degradation of a lithium-ion battery, with the root mean square error being
0.005 and the mean absolute percentage error being 0.416. Table 3 shows the summary
of recent progress on data-driven techniques of battery degradation estimation. Table 6
summarizes the different data-driven approaches.
Table 6. Various kinds of data-driven approaches for battery degradation prediction.
Techniques Accuracy Advantages Disadvantages Reference
ANN Error 5.9%
In order to support proactive
maintenance plans, ANN can
effectively anticipate degradation,
adapt to a variety of battery types,
and capture complicated
correlations in battery data.
When it comes to effectively simulating
the changing behavior and degradation
processes seen in battery systems over
time, artificial neural networks fall short
in their intrinsic ability to grasp
temporal dependencies and long-term
trends in time series data.
[173]
SVM
Root mean
square error is
0.11%.
Model
accuracy is
99.89%.
SVM is useful for precise estimation
of battery deterioration because it is
good at handling high-dimensional
data, resilient against overfitting,
and successful in nonlinear
relationships.
The primary drawback of using support
vector machines (SVM) to estimate
battery deterioration is that it is very
dependent on the kernel function
selected and requires parameter
adjustment, which can lead to a
computationally complicated and
complex model.
[166]
RVM
Relative
prediction
error 3.3%
Relevance vector machines offer
sparse solutions, which maximize
computational efficiency and
improve model interpretability. This
is the fundamental benefit of using
RVMs to estimate battery
deterioration.
relevance vector machines are less
appropriate for big datasets or real-time
applications due to their computational
complexity and longer training times
when compared to simpler models like
SVM. This is the fundamental drawback
of using RVMs to estimate battery
deterioration.
[168]
GPR
Mean
absolute
percentage
error 0.4%
The capacity to provide probabilistic
forecasts, which provide insights
into uncertainty levels and facilitate
better-informed decision-making in
battery health management, is the
primary benefit of gaussian process
regression (GPR) for estimating
battery deterioration.
Due to its high memory needs and
computational complexity, gaussian
process regression is not as useful for
anticipating battery deterioration in
real-time scenarios, especially when
dealing with huge datasets.
[171]
DL
Median
prediction
error 1.1%
The capacity of deep learning to
automatically identify complicated
patterns and correlations from
complex battery performance data is
its most significant benefit for
evaluating battery degradation. This
ability to produce precise forecasts
and facilitate proactive maintenance
plans makes deep learning an
invaluable tool.
The primary drawback of deep learning
for battery degradation estimation is
that it is susceptible to overfitting,
especially when there is a dearth of
training data. Because deep learning
models are complicated, large quantities
of data may be needed to generalize
properly and prevent them from
producing predictions that are unduly
particular.
[158]

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 25 of 32
Table 6. Cont.
Techniques Accuracy Advantages Disadvantages Reference
LSTM
Model
accuracy is
99.6%
The fundamental benefit of using a
long short-term memory network to
estimate battery deterioration is that
it can accurately forecast
degradation levels and remaining
usable life by capturing long-term
dependencies and temporal patterns
in battery performance data.
When trained on sparse data, LSTM
models are especially vulnerable to
overfitting, which happens when the
model learns to recall the training data
rather than generalizing to new
examples.
[174]
GRU
Root mean
square error is
2.4%
GRU methods are particularly good
at identifying long-term
relationships in time series data,
which makes it possible for them to
study how battery behavior and
degradation patterns change over
time.
GRU networks are excellent at
capturing long-term associations, but
they may struggle to recall specifics over
very lengthy periods.
This may limit their use in modeling
complex battery characteristics or
extended deterioration patterns.
[177]
6. Conclusions and Future Directions
Battery degradation can significantly impact BMSs and EVs. This review illuminates
the complex factors influencing lithium-ion battery degradation, stressing its crucial im-
plications for sustainable energy storage and EVs. This paper offers insights into the
multifaceted nature of battery degradation, examining its impacts on performance metrics
like capacity fade, increased internal resistance, and reduced energy density. Various degra-
dation mechanisms, including electrolyte breakdown, SEI formation, temperature, SOC,
and DOD variation, cycling, and calendar aging, are thoroughly analyzed. SEI formation in-
creases battery impedance, leading to capacity fade, while factors such as high temperature
and depth of discharge contribute to electrolyte breakdown, increasing internal resistance
and reducing capacity. SOC saturation accounts for 90% of cycling degradation. Acknowl-
edging the importance of addressing degradation challenges, this review underscores
the need for innovative, data-driven strategies to model degradation effects and improve
battery system longevity and sustainability. Based on critical discussion, information, and
analysis, this study proposes the following suggestions and future directions:
■ Electrolyte breakdown and the formation of SEI are key factors contributing to bat-
tery degradation. Research into novel electrode materials, electrolytes, and coatings
can potentially result in batteries with enhanced durability, stability, and resistance
to degradation mechanisms such as electrode dissolution, electrolyte decomposi-
tion, and SEI formation. Integration of advanced nanomaterials, solid-state elec-
trolytes, and multifunctional coatings has the potential to improve battery perfor-
mance
and longevity.
■ The detrimental effects of heat stress and overheating in EV batteries can be mitigated
through enhanced thermal management systems, which incorporate active cooling,
thermal insulation, and temperature regulation. Longer battery life spans and optimal
operating temperatures can be attained by integrating advanced cooling technologies
such as liquid immersion cooling, thermoelectric cooling, and phase change materials.
■ Energy consumption in EV batteries can be maximized, and degradation effects
reduced by implementing dynamic load-balancing strategies, adaptive energy man-
agement algorithms, and intelligent charging profiles. BMS can decrease losses caused
by deterioration and enhance overall battery performance by adjusting charging pa-
rameters in response to environmental conditions and battery status.
■ The integration of AI and ML algorithms holds great potential for predictive modeling
and optimization of battery degradation under diverse operating conditions. Lever-
aging data-driven approaches can enable proactive maintenance strategies, predictive

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 26 of 32
failure analysis, and adaptive control algorithms, thereby enhancing the efficiency
and reliability of the battery systems.
■ Real-time monitoring of battery degradation and health can be facilitated by imple-
menting advanced diagnostic techniques such as electrochemical impedance spec-
troscopy (EIS), voltammetry, and impedance spectroscopy. Lithium-ion battery sys-
tems can benefit from proactive maintenance and management enabled by the inte-
gration of sensor technologies and data analytics platforms.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.R. and T.A.; methodology, T.A.; formal analysis, T.R.
and T.A.; investigation, T.R. and T.A.; resources, T.A.; data curation, T.R.; writing—original draft
preparation, T.R. and T.A.; writing—review and editing, T.A.; visualization, T.R.; supervision, T.A.;
funding acquisition, T.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The Researchers would like to thank the Deanship of Graduate Studies and Scientific
Research at Qassim University for financial support (QU-APC-2024-9/1).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Huang, W.C.; Zhang, Q.; You, F. Impacts of battery energy storage technologies and renewable integration on the energy transition
in the New York State. Adv. Appl. Energy 2022, 9, 100126. [CrossRef]
2. Lipu, M.S.H.; Mamun, A.A.; Ansari, S.; Miah, M.S.; Hasan, K.; Meraj, S.T.; Abdolrasol, M.G.M.; Rahman, T.; Maruf, M.H.; Sarker,
M.R.; et al. Battery Management, Key Technologies, Methods, Issues, and Future Trends of Electric Vehicles: A Pathway toward
Achieving Sustainable Development Goals. Batteries 2022, 8, 119. [CrossRef]
3. Huang, P .; Zeng, G.; He, Y.; Liu, S.; Li, E.; Bai, Z. Damage evolution mechanism and early warning using long short-term memory
networks for battery slight overcharge cycles. Renew. Energy 2023, 127, 119171. [CrossRef]
4. Habib, A.K.M.A.; Hasan, M.K.; Issa, G.F.; Singh, D.; Islam, S.; Ghazal, T.M. Lithium-Ion Battery Management System for Electric
Vehicles: Constraints, Challenges, and Recommendations. Batteries 2023, 9, 152. [CrossRef]
5. Edge, J.S.; O’Kane, S.; Prosser, R.; Kirkaldy, N.D.; Patel, A.N.; Hales, A.; Ghosh, A.; Ai, W.; Chen, J.; Yang, J.; et al. Lithium ion
battery degradation: What you need to know. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2021, 23, 8200–8221. [CrossRef]
6. Spitthoff, L.; Wahl, M.S.; Lamb, J.J.; Shearing, P .R.; Vie, P .J.S.; Burheim, O.S. On the Relations between Lithium-Ion Battery
Reaction Entropy, Surface Temperatures and Degradation.Batteries 2023, 9, 249. [CrossRef]
7. Sarkar, J.; Bhattacharyya, S. Application of graphene and graphene-based materials in clean energy-related devices Minghui.
Arch. Thermodyn. 2012, 33, 23–40. [CrossRef]
8. Birkl, C.R.; Roberts, M.R.; McTurk, E.; Bruce, P .G.; Howey, D.A. Degradation diagnostics for lithium ion cells.J. Power Sources
2017, 341, 373–386. [CrossRef]
9. Perez, A.; Moreno, R.; Moreira, R.; Orchard, M.E.; Strbac, G. Effect of Battery Degradation—Policy invest by imperial. IEEE
2018, 1–11.
10. Amini, M.; Nazari, M.H.; Hosseinian, S.H. Predictive energy management strategy for battery energy storage considering battery
degradation cost. IET Renew. Power Gener. 2023, 17, 1119–1138. [CrossRef]
11. Timilsina, L.; Badr, P .R.; Hoang, P .H.; Ozkan, G.; Papari, B.; Edrington, C.S. Battery Degradation in Electric and Hybrid Electric
Vehicles: A Survey Study. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 42431–42462. [CrossRef]
12. Cui, J.; Tan, Q.; Liu, L.; Li, J. Environmental Benefit Assessment of Second-Life Use of Electric Vehicle Lithium-Ion Batteries
in Multiple Scenarios Considering Performance Degradation and Economic Value. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2023, 57, 8559–8567.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Pasini, G.; Lutzemberger, G.; Ferrari, L. Renewable Electricity for Decarbonisation of Road Transport: Batteries or E-Fuels?
Batteries 2023, 9, 135. [CrossRef]
14. Xu, R.; Wang, Y.; Chen, Z. Data-Driven Battery Aging Mechanism Analysis and Degradation Pathway Prediction.Batteries 2023,
9, 129. [CrossRef]
15. Chen, Y.; Miao, Q.; Zheng, B.; Wu, S.; Pecht, M. Quantitative analysis of lithium-ion battery capacity prediction via adaptive
bathtub-shaped function. Energies 2013, 6, 3082–3096. [CrossRef]
16. Lipu, M.S.H.; Miah, M.S.; Jamal, T.; Rahman, T.; Ansari, S.; Rahman, M.S.; Ashique, R.H.; Shihavuddin, A.S.M.; Shakib, M.N.
Artificial Intelligence Approaches for Advanced Battery Management System in Electric Vehicle Applications: A Statistical
Analysis towards Future Research Opportunities. Vehicles 2023, 6, 22–70. [CrossRef]
17. Xiong, R.; Pan, Y.; Shen, W.; Li, H.; Sun, F. Lithium-ion battery aging mechanisms and diagnosis method for automotive
applications: Recent advances and perspectives. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020, 131, 110048. [CrossRef]
18. Liu, J.; Zhou, L.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, J.; Wang, Z. Aging behavior and mechanisms of lithium-ion battery under multi-aging path.J.
Clean. Prod. 2023, 423, 138678. [CrossRef]

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 27 of 32
19. Liu, D.; Song, Y.; Li, L.; Liao, H.; Peng, Y.; Guo, J.; Li, Y.; Pedersen, K.; Stroe, D.; Sarkar, J.; et al. Lithium-Ion Battery Operation,
Degradation, and Aging Mechanism in Electric Vehicles: An Overview. Energies 2021, 14, 5220. [CrossRef]
20. Wankmüller, F.; Thimmapuram, P .R.; Gallagher, K.G.; Botterud, A. Impact of battery degradation on energy arbitrage revenue of
grid-level energy storage. J. Energy Storage 2017, 10, 56–66. [CrossRef]
21. Ou, S. Estimate long-term impact on battery degradation by considering electric vehicle real-world end-use factors. J. Power
Sources 2023, 573, 233133. [CrossRef]
22. Kaliaperumal, M.; Dharanendrakumar, M.S.; Prasanna, S.; Abhishek, K.V .; Chidambaram, R.K.; Adams, S.; Zaghib, K.; Reddy,
M.V . Cause and mitigation of lithium-ion battery failure—A review.Materials 2021, 14, 5676. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Afzal, A.; Bhutto, J.K.; Alrobaian, A.; Kaladgi, A.R.; Khan, S.A. Modelling and computational experiment to obtain optimized
neural network for battery thermal management data. Energies 2021, 14, 7370. [CrossRef]
24. Sun, J.; Ye, L.; Zhao, X.; Zhang, P .; Yang, J. Electronic Modulation and Structural Engineering of Carbon-Based Anodes for
Low-Temperature Lithium-Ion Batteries: A Review. Molecules 2023, 28, 2108. [CrossRef]
25. Keil, P .; Schuster, S.F.; Wilhelm, J.; Travi, J.; Hauser, A.; Karl, R.C.; Jossen, A. Calendar Aging of Lithium-Ion Batteries. J.
Electrochem. Soc. 2016, 163, A1872–A1880. [CrossRef]
26. Ohzuku, T.; Iwakoshi, Y.; Sawai, K. Formation of Lithium-Graphite Intercalation Compounds in Nonaqueous Electrolytes and
Their Application as a Negative Electrode for a Lithium Ion (Shuttlecock) Cell.J. Electrochem. Soc. 1993, 140, 2490–2498. [CrossRef]
27. Barré, A.; Deguilhem, B.; Grolleau, S.; Gérard, M.; Suard, F.; Riu, D. A review on lithium-ion battery ageing mechanisms and
estimations for automotive applications. J. Power Sources 2013, 241, 680–689. [CrossRef]
28. Atalay, S.; Sheikh, M.; Mariani, A.; Merla, Y.; Bower, E.; Widanage, W.D. Theory of battery ageing in a lithium-ion battery:
Capacity fade, nonlinear ageing and lifetime prediction. J. Power Sources 2020, 478, 229026. [CrossRef]
29. Carnovale, A.; Li, X. A modeling and experimental study of capacity fade for lithium-ion batteries. Energy AI 2020, 2, 100032.
[CrossRef]
30. Pantenburg, I.; Cronau, M.; Boll, T.; Duncker, A.; Roling, B. Challenging Prevalent Solid Electrolyte Interphase (SEI) Models: An
Atom Probe Tomography Study on a Commercial Graphite Electrode. ACS Nano 2023, 17, 21531–21538. [CrossRef]
31. Luo, G.; Zhang, Y.; Tang, A. Capacity Degradation and Aging Mechanisms Evolution of Lithium-Ion Batteries under Different
Operation Conditions. Energies 2023, 16, 4232. [CrossRef]
32. Maheshwari, A. Modelling, Aging and Optimal Operation of Lithium-Ion Batteries; Eindhoven University of Technology: Eindhoven,
The Netherlands, 2018; ISBN 9789038646077.
33. Agubra, V .A.; Fergus, J.W. The formation and stability of the solid electrolyte interface on the graphite anode.J. Power Sources
2014, 268, 153–162. [CrossRef]
34. Zhang, Q.; Wang, D.; Schaltz, E.; Stroe, D.I.; Gismero, A.; Yang, B. Lithium-ion battery calendar aging mechanism analysis and
impedance-based State-of-Health estimation method. J. Energy Storage 2023, 64, 107029. [CrossRef]
35. Deckenbach, D.; Schneider, J.J. A Long-Overlooked Pitfall in Rechargeable Zinc–Air Batteries: Proper Electrode Balancing. Adv.
Mater. Interfaces 2023, 10, 2202494. [CrossRef]
36. Cheng, L.; Wan, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Gao, D.W. Operational Reliability Modeling and Assessment of Battery Energy Storage Based on
Lithium-ion Battery Lifetime Degradation. J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 2022, 10, 1738–1749. [CrossRef]
37. Köbbing, L.; Latz, A.; Horstmann, B. Growth of the solid-electrolyte interphase: Electron diffusion versus solvent diffusion. J.
Power Sources 2023, 561, 232651. [CrossRef]
38. Alzate-Vargas, L.; Blau, S.M.; Spotte-Smith, E.W.C.; Allu, S.; Persson, K.A.; Fattebert, J.L. Insight into SEI Growth in Li-Ion
Batteries using Molecular Dynamics and Accelerated Chemical Reactions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2021, 125, 18588–18596. [CrossRef]
39. Kamyab, N.; Weidner, J.W.; White, R.E. Mixed Mode Growth Model for the Solid Electrolyte Interface (SEI).J. Electrochem. Soc.
2019, 166, A334–A341. [CrossRef]
40. Ploehn, H.J.; Ramadass, P .; White, R.E. Solvent Diffusion Model for Aging of Lithium-Ion Battery Cells.J. Electrochem. Soc. 2004,
151, A456. [CrossRef]
41. Smith, A.J.; Fang, Y.; Mikheenkova, A.; Ekström, H.; Svens, P .; Ahmed, I.; Lacey, M.J.; Lindbergh, G.; Furó, I.; Lindström, R.W.
Localized lithium plating under mild cycling conditions in high-energy lithium-ion batteries. J. Power Sources 2023, 573, 233118.
[CrossRef]
42. Campbell, I.D.; Marzook, M.; Marinescu, M.; Offer, G.J. How Observable Is Lithium Plating? Differential Voltage Analysis to
Identify and Quantify Lithium Plating Following Fast Charging of Cold Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2019, 166,
A725–A739. [CrossRef]
43. Ando, K.; Matsuda, T.; Miwa, T.; Kawai, M.; Imamura, D. Degradation mechanism of all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries with
argyrodite Li7−xPS6−xClx sulfide through high-temperature cycling test. Batter. Energy 2023, 2, 20220052. [CrossRef]
44. Waldmann, T.; Hogg, B.I.; Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, M. Li plating as unwanted side reaction in commercial Li-ion cells—A review.J.
Power Sources 2018, 384, 107–124. [CrossRef]
45. Juarez-Robles, D.; Vyas, A.A.; Fear, C.; Jeevarajan, J.A.; Mukherjee, P .P . Overcharge and Aging Analytics of Li-ion Cells. J.
Electrochem. Soc. 2020, 167, 090547. [CrossRef]
46. Che, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Forest, F.E.; Sui, X.; Hu, X.; Teodorescu, R. Predictive health assessment for lithium-ion batteries with
probabilistic degradation prediction and accelerating aging detection. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2024, 241, 109603. [CrossRef]

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 28 of 32
47. Janakiraman, U.; Garrick, T.R.; Fortier, M.E. Review—Lithium Plating Detection Methods in Li-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc.
2020, 167, 160552. [CrossRef]
48. Ren, Y.; Widanage, D.; Marco, J. A Plating-Free Charging Scheme for Battery Module Based on Anode Potential Estimation to
Prevent Lithium Plating. Batteries 2023, 9, 294. [CrossRef]
49. Koleti, U.R.; Rajan, A.; Tan, C.; Moharana, S.; Dinh, T.Q.; Marco, J. A study on the influence of lithium plating on battery
degradation. Energies 2020, 13, 3458. [CrossRef]
50. Diallo, M.S.; Shi, T.; Zhang, Y.; Peng, X.; Shozib, I.; Wang, Y.; Miara, L.J.; Scott, M.C.; Tu, Q.H.; Ceder, G. Effect of solid-electrolyte
pellet density on failure of solid-state batteries. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 858. [CrossRef]
51. Gu, J.; Chen, X.; He, Z.; Liang, Z.; Lin, Y.; Shi, J.; Yang, Y. Decoding Internal Stress-Induced Micro-Short Circuit Events in
Sulfide-Based All-Solid-State Li-Metal Batteries via Operando Pressure Measurements. Adv. Energy Mater. 2023, 13, 2302643.
[CrossRef]
52. Agubra, V .; Fergus, J. Lithium ion battery anode aging mechanisms. Materials 2013, 6, 1310–1325. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Wang, H.; Whitacre, J.F. Inhomogeneous aging of cathode materials in commercial 18650 lithium ion battery cells. J. Energy
Storage 2021, 35, 102244. [CrossRef]
54. Zhao, X.; Yin, Y.; Hu, Y.; Choe, S.Y. Electrochemical-thermal modeling of lithium plating/stripping of Li(Ni0.6Mn0.2Co0.2)O2/Carbon
lithium-ion batteries at subzero ambient temperatures. J. Power Sources 2019, 418, 61–73. [CrossRef]
55. Zhang, G.; Wei, X.; Han, G.; Dai, H.; Zhu, J.; Wang, X.; Tang, X.; Ye, J. Lithium plating on the anode for lithium-ion batteries
during long-term low temperature cycling. J. Power Sources 2021, 484, 229312. [CrossRef]
56. Saxena, S.; Roman, D.; Robu, V .; Flynn, D.; Pecht, M. Battery stress factor ranking for accelerated degradation test planning using
machine learning. Energies 2021, 14, 723. [CrossRef]
57. Liu, G.; Wan, W.; Nie, Q.; Zhang, C.; Chen, X.; Lin, W.; Wei, X.; Huang, Y.; Li, J.; Wang, C. Controllable Long-term Lithium
Replenishment for Enhancing Energy Density and Cycle Life of Lithium-ion Batteries. Energy Environ. Sci. 2024, 17, 1163–1174.
[CrossRef]
58. Wang, L.; Yin, S.; Zhang, C.; Huan, Y.; Xu, J. Mechanical characterization and modeling for anodes and cathodes in lithium-ion
batteries. J. Power Sources 2018, 392, 265–273. [CrossRef]
59. Fathiannasab, H.; Zhu, L.; Chen, Z. Chemo-mechanical modeling of stress evolution in all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries using
synchrotron transmission X-ray microscopy tomography. J. Power Sources 2021, 483, 229028. [CrossRef]
60. Kemeny, M.; Ondrejka, P .; Mikolasek, M. Comprehensive Degradation Analysis of NCA Li-Ion Batteries via Methods of
Electrochemical Characterisation for Various Stress-Inducing Scenarios. Batteries 2023, 9, 33. [CrossRef]
61. Han, X.; Lu, L.; Zheng, Y.; Feng, X.; Li, Z.; Li, J.; Ouyang, M. A review on the key issues of the lithium ion battery degradation
among the whole life cycle. eTransportation 2019, 1, 100005. [CrossRef]
62. Xu, J. Critical Review on cathode–electrolyte Interphase Toward High-Voltage Cathodes for Li-Ion Batteries.Nano-Micro Lett.
2022, 14, 166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Gao, X.; Ikuhara, Y.H.; Fisher, C.A.J.; Huang, R.; Kuwabara, A.; Moriwake, H.; Kohama, K.; Ikuhara, Y. Oxygen loss and surface
degradation during electrochemical cycling of lithium-ion battery cathode material LiMn2O4.J. Mater. Chem. A 2019, 7, 8845–8854.
[CrossRef]
64. Arabolla Rodríguez, R.; González Montiel, M.; Della Santina Mohallem, N.; Mosqueda Laffita, Y.; Andrey Montoro, L.; Avila
Santos, M.; León Ramírez, H.; Pérez-Cappe, E.L. The role of defects on the Jahn-teller effect and electrochemical charge storage in
nanometric LiMn2O4 material. Solid State Ion. 2021, 369, 115707. [CrossRef]
65. Kim, S.; Huang, H.Y.S. Mechanical stresses at the cathode-electrolyte interface in lithium-ion batteries. J. Mater. Res. 2016, 31,
3506–3512. [CrossRef]
66. Gao, X.; He, P .; Ren, J.; Xu, J. Modeling of contact stress among compound particles in high energy lithium-ion battery.Energy
Storage Mater. 2019, 18, 23–33. [CrossRef]
67. Son, S.B.; Zhang, Z.; Gim, J.; Johnson, C.S.; Tsai, Y.; Kalensky, M.; Lopykinski, S.; Kahvecioglu, O.; Yang, Z.; Montoya, A.T.; et al.
Transition Metal Dissolution in Lithium-Ion Cells: A Piece of the Puzzle. J. Phys. Chem. C 2023, 127, 1767–1775. [CrossRef]
68. Frankenberger, M.; Trunk, M.; Seidlmayer, S.; Dinter, A.; Dittloff, J.; Werner, L.; Gernhäuser, R.; Revay, Z.; Märkisch, B.; Gilles, R.;
et al. SEI growth impacts of lamination, formation and cycling in lithium ion batteries. Batteries 2020, 6, 21. [CrossRef]
69. Shinagawa, C.; Ushiyama, H.; Yamashita, K. Multiscale Simulations for Lithium-Ion Batteries: SEI Film Growth and Capacity
Fading. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164, A3018–A3024. [CrossRef]
70. Roy, P .K.; Shahjalal, M.; Shams, T.; Fly, A.; Stoyanov, S.; Ahsan, M.; Haider, J. A Critical Review on Battery Aging and State
Estimation Technologies of Lithium-Ion Batteries: Prospects and Issues. Electronics 2023, 12, 4105. [CrossRef]
71. Wang, L.F.; Geng, M.M.; Ding, X.N.; Fang, C.; Zhang, Y.; Shi, S.S.; Zheng, Y.; Yang, K.; Zhan, C.; Wang, X.D. Research progress of
the electrochemical impedance technique applied to the high-capacity lithium-ion battery. Int. J. Miner. Metall. Mater. 2021, 28,
538–552. [CrossRef]
72. Hunter, J.C. Preparation of a new crystal form of manganese dioxide: λ-MnO2. J. Solid State Chem. 1994, 48, 173–174. [CrossRef]
73. Li, W. Review—An Unpredictable Hazard in Lithium-ion Batteries from Transition Metal Ions: Dissolution from Cathodes,
Deposition on Anodes and Elimination Strategies. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2020, 167, 090514. [CrossRef]
74. Vermeer, W.; Chandra Mouli, G.R.; Bauer, P . A Comprehensive Review on the Characteristics and Modeling of Lithium-Ion
Battery Aging. IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrif. 2022, 8, 2205–2232. [CrossRef]

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 29 of 32
75. Mikheenkova, A.; Gustafsson, O.; Misiewicz, C.; Brant, W.R.; Hahlin, M.; Lacey, M.J. Resolving high potential structural
deterioration in Ni-rich layered cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries operando. J. Energy Storage 2023, 57, 106211. [CrossRef]
76. Love, C.T.; Korovina, A.; Patridge, C.J.; Swider-Lyons, K.E.; Twigg, M.E.; Ramaker, D.E. Review of LiFePO 4 Phase Transition
Mechanisms and New Observations from X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2013, 160, A3153–A3161. [CrossRef]
77. Zhan, C.; Wu, T.; Lu, J.; Amine, K. Dissolution, migration, and deposition of transition metal ions in Li-ion batteries exemplified
by Mn-based cathodes-A critical review. Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11, 243–257. [CrossRef]
78. Vu, T.T.; Cheon, H.J.; Shin, S.Y.; Jeong, G.; Wi, E.; Chang, M. Hybrid electrolytes for solid-state lithium batteries: Challenges,
progress, and prospects. Energy Storage Mater. 2023, 61, 102876. [CrossRef]
79. Liao, X.; Huang, Q.; Mai, S.; Wang, X.; Xu, M.; Xing, L.; Liao, Y.; Li, W. Understanding self-discharge mechanism of layered nickel
cobalt manganese oxide at high potential. J. Power Sources 2015, 286, 551–556. [CrossRef]
80. Wandt, J.; Freiberg, A.; Thomas, R.; Gorlin, Y.; Siebel, A.; Jung, R.; Gasteiger, H.A.; Tromp, M. Transition metal dissolution and
deposition in Li-ion batteries investigated by operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy. J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 18300–18305.
[CrossRef]
81. Rynearson, L.; Antolini, C.; Jayawardana, C.; Yeddala, M.; Hayes, D.; Lucht, B.L. Speciation of Transition Metal Dissolution in
Electrolyte from Common Cathode Materials. Angew. Chem. 2024, 136, e202317109. [CrossRef]
82. Huang, D.; Engtrakul, C.; Nanayakkara, S.; Mulder, D.W.; Han, S.D.; Zhou, M.; Luo, H.; Tenent, R.C. Understanding Degradation
at the Lithium-Ion Battery Cathode/Electrolyte Interface: Connecting Transition-Metal Dissolution Mechanisms to Electrolyte
Composition. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 11930–11939. [CrossRef]
83. Krupp, A.; Beckmann, R.; Diekmann, T.; Ferg, E.; Schuldt, F.; Agert, C. Calendar aging model for lithium-ion batteries considering
the influence of cell characterization. J. Energy Storage 2022, 45, 103506. [CrossRef]
84. Dai, Q.; Kelly, J.C.; Gaines, L.; Wang, M. Life Cycle Analysis of Lithium-Ion Batteries for Automotive Applications. Batteries 2019,
5, 48. [CrossRef]
85. Hou, J.; Qu, S.; Yang, M.; Zhang, J. Materials and electrode engineering of high capacity anodes in lithium ion batteries. J. Power
Sources 2020, 450, 227697. [CrossRef]
86. Lucu, M.; Martinez-Laserna, E.; Gandiaga, I.; Liu, K.; Camblong, H.; Widanage, W.D.; Marco, J. Data-driven nonparametric Li-ion
battery ageing model aiming at learning from real operation data—Part B: Cycling operation. J. Energy Storage 2020, 30, 101410.
[CrossRef]
87. Serhan, M.; Sprowls, M.; Jackemeyer, D.; Long, M.; Perez, I.D.; Maret, W.; Tao, N.; Forzani, E. Total iron measurement in human
serum with a smartphone. In Proceedings of the AIChE Annual Meeting Conference Proceedings, San Francisco, CA, USA, 15–20
November 2019; pp. 1–3.
88. Lee, Y.K. Effect of transition metal ions on solid electrolyte interphase layer on the graphite electrode in lithium ion battery.J.
Power Sources 2021, 484, 229270. [CrossRef]
89. Xu, B.; Oudalov, A.; Ulbig, A.; Andersson, G.; Kirschen, D.S. Modeling of lithiumion battery degradation for cell life assessment.
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2018, 9, 1131–1140. [CrossRef]
90. Lee, C.H.; Wu, Z.Y.; Hsu, S.H.; Jiang, J.A. Cycle Life Study of Li-Ion Batteries with an Aging-Level-Based Charging Method. IEEE
Trans. Energy Convers. 2020, 35, 1475–1484. [CrossRef]
91. Campion, C.L.; Li, W.; Lucht, B.L. Thermal Decomposition of LiPF6-Based Electrolytes for Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem.
Soc. 2005, 152, A2327. [CrossRef]
92. Xu, J.; Deshpande, R.D.; Pan, J.; Cheng, Y.-T.; Battaglia, V .S. Electrode Side Reactions, Capacity Loss and Mechanical Degradation
in Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2015, 162, A2026–A2035. [CrossRef]
93. Pinson, M.B.; Bazant, M.Z. Theory of SEI Formation in Rechargeable Batteries: Capacity Fade, Accelerated Aging and Lifetime
Prediction. ECS Meet. Abstr. 2013, MA2013-01, 405. [CrossRef]
94. Alsagri, A.S. An innovative design of solar-assisted carnot battery for multigeneration of power, cooling, and process heating:
Techno-economic analysis and optimization. Renew. Energy 2023, 210, 375–385. [CrossRef]
95. Alsagri, A.S.; Rahbari, H.R.; Wang, L.; Arabkoohsar, A. Thermo-economic optimization of an innovative integration of thermal
energy storage and supercritical CO2 cycle using artificial intelligence techniques. Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2024, 186, 1373–1386.
[CrossRef]
96. Alsagri, A.S.; Arabkoohsar, A.; Khosravi, M.; Alrobaian, A.A. Efficient and cost-effective district heating system with decentralized
heat storage units, and triple-pipes. Energy 2019, 188, 116035. [CrossRef]
97. Wood, S.M.; Fang, C.; Dufek, E.J.; Nagpure, S.C.; Sazhin, S.V .; Liaw, B.; Meng, Y.S. Predicting Calendar Aging in Lithium Metal
Secondary Batteries: The Impacts of Solid Electrolyte Interphase Composition and Stability. Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8. [CrossRef]
98. Dose, W.M.; Temprano, I.; Allen, J.P .; Björklund, E.; O’Keefe, C.A.; Li, W.; Mehdi, B.L.; Weatherup, R.S.; De Volder, M.F.L.; Grey,
C.P . Electrolyte Reactivity at the Charged Ni-Rich Cathode Interface and Degradation in Li-Ion Batteries. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2022, 14, 13206–13222. [CrossRef]
99. Fermín-Cueto, P .; McTurk, E.; Allerhand, M.; Medina-Lopez, E.; Anjos, M.F.; Sylvester, J.; dos Reis, G. Identification and machine
learning prediction of knee-point and knee-onset in capacity degradation curves of lithium-ion cells. Energy AI 2020, 1. [CrossRef]
100. Aris, A.M.; Shabani, B. An Experimental Study of a Lithium Ion Cell Operation at Low Temperature Conditions. Energy Procedia
2017, 110, 128–135. [CrossRef]

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 30 of 32
101. Zhang, X.; Zhang, W.; Li, H.; Zhang, M. Review on state of charge estimation methods for Li-ion batteries. Trans. Electr. Electron.
Mater. 2017, 18, 136–140. [CrossRef]
102. Li, Q.; Jiao, S.; Luo, L.; Ding, M.S.; Zheng, J.; Cartmell, S.S.; Wang, C.M.; Xu, K.; Zhang, J.G.; Xu, W. Wide-Temperature Electrolytes
for Lithium-Ion Batteries. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 18826–18835. [CrossRef]
103. Gao, F.; Tang, Z. Kinetic behavior of LiFePO4/C cathode material for lithium-ion batteries. Electrochim. Acta 2008, 53, 5071–5075.
[CrossRef]
104. Almeida, C.S. Analysis of the co-dispersion structure of health-related indicators, the center of the subject’s sense of health, and
the elderly people living at home. Rev. Bras. Linguística Apl. 2016, 5, 1689–1699.
105. Kalaga, K.; Rodrigues, M.T.F.; Trask, S.E.; Shkrob, I.A.; Abraham, D.P . Calendar-life versus cycle-life aging of lithium-ion cells
with silicon-graphite composite electrodes. Electrochim. Acta 2018, 280, 221–228. [CrossRef]
106. Yang, B.; Zhang, H.; Yu, L.; Fan, W.Z.; Huang, D. Lithium difluorophosphate as an additive to improve the low temperature
performance of LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2/graphite cells. Electrochim. Acta 2016, 221, 107–114. [CrossRef]
107. Ren, D.; Smith, K.; Guo, D.; Han, X.; Feng, X.; Lu, L.; Ouyang, M.; Li, J. Investigation of Lithium Plating-Stripping Process in
Li-Ion Batteries at Low Temperature Using an Electrochemical Model. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2018, 165, A2167–A2178. [CrossRef]
108. Tang, X.; Wang, Y.; Zou, C.; Yao, K.; Xia, Y.; Gao, F. A novel framework for Lithium-ion battery modeling considering uncertainties
of temperature and aging. Energy Convers. Manag. 2019, 180, 162–170. [CrossRef]
109. Hahn, S.L.; Storch, M.; Swaminathan, R.; Obry, B.; Bandlow, J.; Birke, K.P . Quantitative validation of calendar aging models for
lithium-ion batteries. J. Power Sources 2018, 400, 402–414. [CrossRef]
110. Röder, P .; Stiaszny, B.; Ziegler, J.C.; Baba, N.; Lagaly, P .; Wiemhöfer, H.D. The impact of calendar aging on the thermal stability of
a LiMn2O4-Li(Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3)O2/graphite lithium-ion cell. J. Power Sources 2014, 268, 315–325. [CrossRef]
111. Wright, R.B.; Motloch, C.G.; Belt, J.R.; Christophersen, J.P .; Ho, C.D.; Richardson, R.A.; Bloom, I.; Jones, S.A.; Battaglia, V .S.;
Henriksen, G.L.; et al. Calendar- and cycle-life studies of advanced technology development program generation 1 lithium-ion
batteries. J. Power Sources 2002, 110, 445–470. [CrossRef]
112. Thomas, E.V .; Bloom, I.; Christophersen, J.P .; Battaglia, V .S. Statistical methodology for predicting the life of lithium-ion cells via
accelerated degradation testing. J. Power Sources 2008, 184, 312–317. [CrossRef]
113. Liu, K.; Ashwin, T.R.; Hu, X.; Lucu, M.; Widanage, W.D. An evaluation study of different modelling techniques for calendar
ageing prediction of lithium-ion batteries. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020, 131, 110017. [CrossRef]
114. Gismero, A.; Stroe, D.I.; Schaltz, E. Calendar Aging Lifetime Model for NMC-based Lithium-ion Batteries Based on EIS
Measurements. In Proceedings of the 2019 Fourteenth International Conference on Ecological Vehicles and Renewable Energies,
Monte-Carlo, Monaco, 8–10 May 2019. [CrossRef]
115. Ning, G.; Haran, B.; Popov, B.N. Capacity fade study of lithium-ion batteries cycled at high discharge rates. J. Power Sources 2003,
117, 160–169. [CrossRef]
116. Cordoba-Arenas, A.; Onori, S.; Guezennec, Y.; Rizzoni, G. Capacity and power fade cycle-life model for plug-in hybrid electric
vehicle lithium-ion battery cells containing blended spinel and layered-oxide positive electrodes. J. Power Sources 2015, 278,
473–483. [CrossRef]
117. Lam, L.; Bauer, P . Practical capacity fading model for Li-ion battery cells in electric vehicles.IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 2013, 28,
5910–5918. [CrossRef]
118. Sun, T.; Xu, B.; Cui, Y.; Feng, X.; Han, X.; Zheng, Y. A sequential capacity estimation for the lithium-ion batteries combining
incremental capacity curve and discrete Arrhenius fading model. J. Power Sources 2021, 484, 229248. [CrossRef]
119. Kim, J.H.; Woo, S.C.; Park, M.S.; Kim, K.J.; Yim, T.; Kim, J.S.; Kim, Y.J. Capacity fading mechanism of LiFePO4-based lithium
secondary batteries for stationary energy storage. J. Power Sources 2013, 229, 190–197. [CrossRef]
120. Li, J.; Gee, A.M.; Zhang, M.; Yuan, W. Analysis of battery lifetime extension in a SMES-battery hybrid energy storage system
using a novel battery lifetime model. Energy 2015, 86, 175–185. [CrossRef]
121. Suri, G.; Onori, S. A control-oriented cycle-life model for hybrid electric vehicle lithium-ion batteries. Energy 2016, 96, 644–653.
[CrossRef]
122. Bui, T.M.N.; Sheikh, M.; Dinh, T.Q.; Gupta, A.; Widanalage, D.W.; Marco, J. A Study of Reduced Battery Degradation through
State-of-Charge Pre-Conditioning for Vehicle-to-Grid Operations. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 155871–155896. [CrossRef]
123. Guena, T.; Leblanc, P . How depth of discharge affects the cycle life of lithium-metal-polymer batteries. In Proceedings of the
INTELEC 06-Twenty-Eighth International Telecommunications Energy Conference, Providence, RI, USA, 10–14 September 2006.
[CrossRef]
124. Redondo-Iglesias, E.; Venet, P .; Pelissier, S. Efficiency Degradation Model of Lithium-Ion Batteries for Electric Vehicles.IEEE
Trans. Ind. Appl. 2019, 55, 1932–1940. [CrossRef]
125. Madani, S.S.; Schaltz, E.; Kær, S.K. Effect of current rate and prior cycling on the coulombic efficiency of a lithium-ion battery.
Batteries 2019, 5, 57. [CrossRef]
126. Chiang, Y.H.; Sean, W.Y.; Ke, J.C. Online estimation of internal resistance and open-circuit voltage of lithium-ion batteries in
electric vehicles. J. Power Sources 2011, 196, 3921–3932. [CrossRef]
127. Lin, N.; Jia, Z.; Wang, Z.; Zhao, H.; Ai, G.; Song, X.; Bai, Y.; Battaglia, V .; Sun, C.; Qiao, J.; et al. Understanding the crack formation
of graphite particles in cycled commercial lithium-ion batteries by focused ion beam—Scanning electron microscopy.J. Power
Sources 2017, 365, 235–239. [CrossRef]

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 31 of 32
128. Chen, X.; Shen, W.; Vo, T.T.; Cao, Z.; Kapoor, A. An overview of lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles. In Proceedings of the
2012 10th International Power & Energy Conference (IPEC), Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 12–14 December 2012; pp. 230–235.
[CrossRef]
129. Fanoro, M.; Božani´ c, M.; Sinha, S. A Review of the Impact of Battery Degradation on Energy Management Systems with a Special
Emphasis on Electric Vehicles. Energies 2022, 15, 5889. [CrossRef]
130. Yang, F.; Xie, Y.; Deng, Y.; Yuan, C. Impacts of battery degradation on state-level energy consumption and GHG emissions from
electric vehicle operation in the United States. Procedia CIRP 2019, 80, 530–535. [CrossRef]
131. Vetter, J.; Nov ák, P .; Wagner, M.R.; Veit, C.; Möller, K.C.; Besenhard, J.O.; Winter, M.; Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, M.; Vogler, C.;
Hammouche, A. Ageing mechanisms in lithium-ion batteries. J. Power Sources 2005, 147, 269–281. [CrossRef]
132. Hall, J.C.; Lin, T.; Brown, G.; Biensan, P .; Bonhomme, F. Decay processes and life predictions for lithium ion satellite cells. In
Proceedings of the Collection Technology Paper, 4th International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference and Exhibit
(IECEC), San Diego, CA, USA, 26–29 June 2006; Volume 1, pp. 632–642. [CrossRef]
133. Marongiu, A.; Roscher, M.; Sauer, D.U. Influence of the vehicle-to-grid strategy on the aging behavior of lithium battery electric
vehicles. Appl. Energy 2015, 137, 899–912. [CrossRef]
134. Ziv, B.; Borgel, V .; Aurbach, D.; Kim, J.-H.; Xiao, X.; Powell, B.R. Investigation of the Reasons for Capacity Fading in Li-Ion Battery
Cells. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2014, 161, A1672–A1680. [CrossRef]
135. Lawder, M.T.; Northrop, P .W.C.; Subramanian, V .R. Model-Based SEI Layer Growth and Capacity Fade Analysis for EV and
PHEV Batteries and Drive Cycles. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2014, 161, A2099–A2108. [CrossRef]
136. Sun, T.; Jiang, S.; Li, X.; Cui, Y.; Lai, X.; Wang, X.; Ma, Y.; Zheng, Y. A Novel Capacity Estimation Approach for Lithium-Ion
Batteries Combining Three-Parameter Capacity Fade Model with Constant Current Charging Curves. IEEE Trans. Energy Convers.
2021, 36, 2574–2584. [CrossRef]
137. Myung, S.T.; Hitoshi, Y.; Sun, Y.K. Electrochemical behavior and passivation of current collectors in lithium-ion batteries.J. Mater.
Chem. 2011, 21, 9891–9911. [CrossRef]
138. Fares, R.L.; Webber, M.E. What are the tradeoffs between battery energy storage cycle life and calendar life in the energy arbitrage
application? J. Energy Storage 2018, 16, 37–45. [CrossRef]
139. Tomaszewska, A.; Chu, Z.; Feng, X.; O’Kane, S.; Liu, X.; Chen, J.; Ji, C.; Endler, E.; Li, R.; Liu, L.; et al. Lithium-ion battery fast
charging: A review. eTransportation 2019, 1, 100011. [CrossRef]
140. Noelle, D.J.; Wang, M.; Le, A.V .; Shi, Y.; Qiao, Y. Internal resistance and polarization dynamics of lithium-ion batteries upon
internal shorting. Appl. Energy 2018, 212, 796–808. [CrossRef]
141. Canals Casals, L.; Schiffer Gonzalez, A.M.; Garcia, B.; Llorca, J. PHEV Battery Aging Study Using Voltage Recovery and Internal
Resistance from Onboard Data. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.2016, 65, 4209–4216. [CrossRef]
142. Tröltzsch, U.; Kanoun, O.; Tränkler, H.R. Characterizing aging effects of lithium ion batteries by impedance spectroscopy.
Electrochim. Acta 2006, 51, 1664–1672. [CrossRef]
143. Yang, F.; Wang, D.; Zhao, Y.; Tsui, K.L.; Bae, S.J. A study of the relationship between coulombic efficiency and capacity degradation
of commercial lithium-ion batteries. Energy 2018, 145, 486–495. [CrossRef]
144. Patil, M.A.; Tagade, P .; Hariharan, K.S.; Kolake, S.M.; Song, T.; Yeo, T.; Doo, S. A novel multistage Support Vector Machine based
approach for Li ion battery remaining useful life estimation. Appl. Energy 2015, 159, 285–297. [CrossRef]
145. Kassem, M.; Delacourt, C. Postmortem analysis of calendar-aged graphite/LiFePO4 cells. J. Power Sources 2013, 235, 159–171.
[CrossRef]
146. Darma, M.S.D.; Lang, M.; Kleiner, K.; Mereacre, L.; Liebau, V .; Fauth, F.; Bergfeldt, T.; Ehrenberg, H. The influence of cycling
temperature and cycling rate on the phase specific degradation of a positive electrode in lithium ion batteries: A post mortem
analysis. J. Power Sources 2016, 327, 714–725. [CrossRef]
147. Palacín, M.R. Understanding ageing in Li-ion batteries: A chemical issue. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, 47, 4924–4933. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
148. Uddin, K.; Perera, S.; Widanage, W.D.; Somerville, L.; Marco, J. Characterising lithium-ion battery degradation through the
identification and tracking of electrochemical battery model parameters. Batteries 2016, 2, 13. [CrossRef]
149. Bandhauer, T.M.; Garimella, S.; Fuller, T.F. A Critical Review of Thermal Issues in Lithium-Ion Batteries.J. Electrochem. Soc. 2011,
158, R1. [CrossRef]
150. Zhang, X.; Winget, B.; Doeff, M.; Evans, J.W.; Devine, T.M. Corrosion of Aluminum Current Collectors in Lithium-Ion Batteries
with Electrolytes Containing LiPF6. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2005, 152, B448. [CrossRef]
151. Lewerenz, M.; Fuchs, G.; Becker, L.; Sauer, D.U. Irreversible calendar aging and quantification of the reversible capacity loss
caused by anode overhang. J. Energy Storage 2018, 18, 149–159. [CrossRef]
152. Guo, W.; He, M. An optimal relevance vector machine with a modified degradation model for remaining useful lifetime prediction
of lithium-ion batteries. Appl. Soft Comput. 2022, 124, 108967. [CrossRef]
153. Zhao, J.; Zhu, Y.; Zhang, B.; Liu, M.; Wang, J.; Liu, C.; Zhang, Y. Method of Predicting SOH and RUL of Lithium-Ion Battery Based
on the Combination of LSTM and GPR. Sustainability 2022, 14, 11865. [CrossRef]
154. Tagade, P .; Hariharan, K.S.; Ramachandran, S.; Khandelwal, A.; Naha, A.; Kolake, S.M.; Han, S.H. Deep Gaussian process
regression for lithium-ion battery health prognosis and degradation mode diagnosis.J. Power Sources 2020, 445, 227281. [CrossRef]

Batteries 2024, 10, 220 32 of 32
155. Rauf, H.; Khalid, M.; Arshad, N. Machine learning in state of health and remaining useful life estimation: Theoretical and
technological development in battery degradation modelling. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2022, 156, 111903. [CrossRef]
156. May, G.; El-Shahat, A. Battery-degradation model based on the ANN regression function for EV applications. In Proceedings of
the 2017 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC), San Jose, CA, USA, 19–22 October 2017; pp. 1–3. [CrossRef]
157. Pang, B.; Chen, L.; Dong, Z. Data-Driven Degradation Modeling and SOH Prediction of Li-Ion Batteries. Batteries 2022, 15, 5580.
[CrossRef]
158. MAlmuhaylan, M.R.; Ghumman, A.R.; Al-Salamah, I.S.; Ahmad, A.; Ghazaw, Y.M.; Haider, H.; Shafiquzzaman, M. Evaluating the
impacts of pumping on aquifer depletion in arid regions using MODFLOW, ANFIS and ANN. Water 2020, 12, 2297. [CrossRef]
159. Kang, L.W.; Zhao, X.; Ma, J. A new neural network model for the state-of-charge estimation in the battery degradation process.
Appl. Energy 2014, 121, 20–27. [CrossRef]
160. Zhao, C.; Li, X. Microgrid Optimal Energy Scheduling Considering Neural Network Based Battery Degradation. IEEE Trans.
Power Syst. 2024, 39, 1594–1606. [CrossRef]
161. Li, W.; Li, Y.; Garg, A.; Guo, L. Enhancing real-time degradation prediction of lithium-ion battery: A digital twin framework with
CNN-LSTM-attention model. Energy 2024, 124, 129681. [CrossRef]
162. Jafari, S.; Byun, Y.C. A CNN-GRU Approach to the Accurate Prediction of Batteries’ Remaining Useful Life from Charging
Profiles. Computers 2023, 12, 219. [CrossRef]
163. Cui, S.; Joe, I. A Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Attention-Based GRU Model with Healthy Features for State-of-Health Estimation of
Lithium-Ion Batteries. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 27374–27388. [CrossRef]
164. Nan, J.; Deng, B.; Cao, W.; Tan, Z. Prediction for the Remaining Useful Life of Lithium–Ion Battery Based on RVM-GM with
Dynamic Size of Moving Window. World Electr. Veh. J. 2022, 13, 25. [CrossRef]
165. Chen, Z.; Shi, N.; Ji, Y.; Niu, M.; Wang, Y. Lithium-ion batteries remaining useful life prediction based on BLS-RVM.Energy 2021,
234, 121269. [CrossRef]
166. Li, X.; Zhang, L.; Wang, Z.; Dong, P . Remaining useful life prediction for lithium-ion batteries based on a hybrid model combining
the long short-term memory and Elman neural networks. J. Energy Storage 2019, 21, 510–518. [CrossRef]
167. Cong, X.; Zhang, C.; Jiang, J.; Zhang, W.; Jiang, Y. A Hybrid Method for the Prediction of the Remaining Useful Life of Lithium-Ion
Batteries with Accelerated Capacity Degradation. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.2020, 69, 12775–12785. [CrossRef]
168. Nash, W.; Drummond, T.; Birbilis, N. A review of deep learning in the study of materials degradation.npj Mater. Degrad. 2018,
2, 37. [CrossRef]
169. Park, K.; Choi, Y.; Choi, W.J.; Ryu, H.Y.; Kim, H. LSTM-Based Battery Remaining Useful Life Prediction with Multi-Channel
Charging Profiles. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 20786–20798. [CrossRef]
170. Chinomona, B.; Chung, C.; Chang, L.K.; Su, W.C.; Tsai, M.C. Long short-term memory approach to estimate battery remaining
useful life using partial data. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 165419–165431. [CrossRef]
171. Li, W.; Sengupta, N.; Dechent, P .; Howey, D.; Annaswamy, A.; Sauer, D.U. One-shot battery degradation trajectory prediction
with deep learning. J. Power Sources 2021, 506, 230024. [CrossRef]
172. Nutakki, T.U.; Alghassab, M.A.; Dutta, A.K.; Abdullaeva, B.S.; Alkhalaf, S.; Alharbi, F.S.; Ghandour, R.; Al Barakeh, Z.; Knani, S.
Thermo-environmental multi- investigation and ANN-based optimization of a novel heat integration criteria system integrated
with a marine engine generating liquefied hydrogen. Case Stud. Therm. Eng. 2024, 56, 104240. [CrossRef]
173. Lu, J.; Xiong, R.; Tian, J.; Wang, C.; Hsu, C.W.; Tsou, N.T.; Sun, F.; Li, J. Battery degradation prediction against uncertain future
conditions with recurrent neural network enabled deep learning. Energy Storage Mater. 2022, 50, 139–151. [CrossRef]
174. Ren, L.; Dong, J.; Wang, X.; Meng, Z.; Zhao, L.; Deen, M.J. A Data-Driven Auto-CNN-LSTM Prediction Model for Lithium-Ion
Battery Remaining Useful Life. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2021, 17, 3478–3487. [CrossRef]
175. Li, Z.; Liu, F.; Yang, W.; Peng, S.; Zhou, J. A Survey of Convolutional Neural Networks: Analysis, Applications, and Prospects.
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2022, 33, 6999–7019. [CrossRef]
176. Costa, N.; Sánchez, L.; Anseán, D.; Dubarry, M. Li-ion battery degradation modes diagnosis via Convolutional Neural Networks.
J. Energy Storage 2022, 55, 105558. [CrossRef]
177. Haris, M.; Hasan, M.N.; Qin, S. Degradation Curve Prediction of Lithium-Ion Batteries Based on Knee Point Detection Algorithm
and Convolutional Neural Network. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2022, 71, 1–10. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.