Forecasting day-ahead electricity prices: A review of state-of-the-art algorithms,
best practices and an open-access benchmark
Jesus Lagoa,b,c,∗, Grzegorz Marcjasz d, Bart De Schutter a, Rafa l Werond
aDelft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
bAlgorithms, Modeling, and Optimization, Energyville, Genk, Belgium
cEnergy Technology, Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO), Mol, Belgium
dDepartment of Operations Research and Business Intelligence, Wroc law University of Science and Technology, Wroc law, Poland
Abstract
While the ﬁeld of electricity price forecasting has beneﬁted from plenty of contributions in the last two decades, it
arguably lacks a rigorous approach to evaluating new predictive algorithms. The latter are often compared using unique,
not publicly available datasets and across too short and limited to one market test samples. The proposed new methods
are rarely benchmarked against well established and well performing simpler models, the accuracy metrics are sometimes
inadequate and testing the signiﬁcance of diﬀerences in predictive performance is seldom conducted. Consequently, it is
not clear which methods perform well nor what are the best practices when forecasting electricity prices. In this paper,
we tackle these issues by comparing state-of-the-art statistical and deep learning methods across multiple years and
markets, and by putting forward a set of best practices. In addition, we make available the considered datasets, forecasts
of the state-of-the-art models, and a speciﬁcally designed python toolbox, so that new algorithms can be rigorously
evaluated in future studies.
Keywords: Electricity price forecasting, Deep learning, Open-access benchmark, Forecast evaluation, Best practices for
price forecasting
1. Introduction
The increasing penetration of renewable energy sources
(RES) in today’s power systems makes electricity gen-
eration more volatile and the resulting electricity prices
harder to predict [1–4]. On the other hand, advances in
electricity price forecasting (EPF) constantly provide new
tools with the ultimate objective of narrowing the gap be-
tween predictions and actual prices. The progress in this
ﬁeld, however, is not steady and easy to follow. In particu-
lar, as concluded by all major review publications, compar-
isons between EPF methods are very diﬃcult since studies
use diﬀerent datasets, diﬀerent software implementations,
and diﬀerent error measures; the lack of statistical rigor
complicates these analyses even further [5–8]. In particu-
lar:
• There are several studies comparing machine learn-
ing (ML) and statistical methods but the conclusions
of these studies are contradictory. Typically, stud-
ies considering advanced statistical techniques only
compare them with simple ML methods [9–11] and
show that statistical methods are obviously better.
Conversely, studies proposing new ML methods only
compare them with simple statistical methods [12–16]
and show that ML models are more accurate.
∗Corresponding author
Email address: j.lagogarcia@tudelft.nl (Jesus Lago)
• In many of the existing studies [17–23] the testing pe-
riods are usually too short to yield conclusive results.
In some cases, the test datasets are limited to one-
week periods [22, 24–30]; this ignores the problem of
special days, e.g. holidays, and is not representative
for the performance of the proposed algorithms across
a whole year. As argued in [5], to have meaningful
conclusions, the test dataset should span at least a
year.
• Some of the existing papers do not provide enough
details to reproduce the research. The three most
common issues are: (i) not specifying the exact split
between the training and test dataset [31–37], (ii) not
indicating the inputs used for the prediction model
[35, 36, 38–40], and (iii) not specifying the dataset
employed [21, 33, 41, 42]. This obviously prevents
other researchers from validating the research results.
These three problems have aggravated over the last
years with the increase in popularity ofdeep learning (DL).
While new published papers on DL for EPF appear almost
every month, and most claim to develop models that ob-
tain state-of-the-art accuracy, the comparisons performed
in those papers are very limited. Particularly, the new
DL methods are usually compared with simpler ML meth-
ods [28, 30, 43–47]. This is obviously problematic as such
comparisons are not fair. Moreover, as the proposed meth-
Preprint submitted to Applied Energy December 22, 2020
arXiv:2008.08004v2  [stat.AP]  21 Dec 2020

ods are not compared with other DL algorithms, new DL
methods are continuously being proposed but it is unclear
how the diﬀerent models perform relatively to each other.
Similar problems arise in the context of hybrid meth-
ods. In recent years, very complex hybrid methods have
been proposed. Typically, these hybrid models are based
on combining a decomposition technique, a feature selec-
tion method, an ML regression model, and sometimes a
type of genetic algorithm for optimization purposes. As
with DL algorithms, these studies usually avoid compar-
isons with well-established methods [21, 25, 34, 42, 48–
50] or resort to comparisons using outdated methodologies
[22, 24, 26, 37, 41, 51, 52]. In addition, while a speciﬁc ge-
netic algorithm or decomposition technique is considered,
most of the studies do not analyze the eﬀect of selecting
a variant of these techniques [21, 24, 50–52]. Thus, the
relative importance of each of the diﬀerent components of
the hybrid methods it is not even clear.
1.1. Motivation and contributions
The above mentioned problems call for three actions.
Firstly, implementing in a popular programming en-
vironment (e.g. python), thoroughly testing and making
available a set of simple but powerful open-source forecast-
ing methods, which can potentially obtain state-of-the-art
results, and that researchers can easily use to evaluate any
new forecasting model.
Secondly, collecting and making freely available to
the EPF community a set of representative benchmark
datasets that researchers can use to evaluate and compare
their methods using long testing periods. Although, some
datasets are available for download without restrictions,
e.g. as supplements to published articles [53] or sample
transaction data [54], they are typically limited in scope
(one market, a 2-3 year timespan or price series only).
Hence, conclusions from such datasets are limited, results
can hardly be extrapolated to other markets, and the rele-
vance of the studies using such data are not entirely clear.
Thirdly, putting forward a set of best practices so that
the conclusions of EPF studies become more meaningful
and fair comparisons can be made.
In this paper, we try to tackle the above via three dis-
tinct contributions:
1. We analyze the existing literature and select what
could arguably be considered as state-of-the-art
among statistical and machine learning methods: the
Lasso Estimated AutoRegressive (LEAR) model 1 [55]
and the Deep Neural Network (DNN) [59], a rela-
tively simple and automated DL method that opti-
mizes hyperparameters and features using Bayesian
1Originally introduced in [55] under the name LassoX and based
on the fARX model, a parameter-rich autoregressive speciﬁcation
with exogenous variables. The name refers to the least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) [56] used to jointly se-
lect features and estimate their parameters. Very similar models
were used in [57] under the name 24lassoDoW,nl and in [58] under
the name 24Lasso1.
optimization. Then, we make our models open-
source and available to other researchers as part
of an open-source python library https://github.
com/jeslago/epftoolbox specially designed for this
study to provide a common research framework for
EPF research [60]. Besides the models, we also pro-
vide extensive documentation [61] for the library.
2. We propose a set of ﬁve open-access benchmark
datasets spanning six years each, that represent a
range of well-established day-ahead, auction type
power markets from around the globe. The datasets
contain day-ahead electricity prices at an hourly fre-
quency and two relevant exogenous variables each.
They can be accessed from the mentioned python li-
brary [60] that is specially designed for this study. To-
gether with the datasets, the library also includes the
forecasts of the open-access methods across the ﬁve
benchmark datasets so that researchers can quickly
make further comparisons without having to re-train
or re-estimate the models.
3. We provide a set of best practice guidelines to con-
duct research in EPF so that new studies are more
sound, reproducible, and the obtained conclusions are
stronger. In addition, we include some of the guide-
lines, e.g. adequate evaluation metrics or statistical
tests, in the the mentioned python library [60] that is
specially designed for this study to provide a common
research framework for EPF research
1.2. Paper structure
The remainder of the paper is organized a follows. Sec-
tion 2 performs a literature review of the current state of
EPF. Sections 3 and 4 respectively present the open-access
benchmark datasets and the open-source benchmark mod-
els. Section 5 describes the set of guidelines and best prac-
tices when performing research in EPF. Section 6 discusses
the forecasting results for all ﬁve datasets. Finally, Section
7 provides a summary and a checklist of the requirements
for meaningful EPF research.
2. Literature review
The ﬁeld of EPF aims at predicting the spot and forward
prices in wholesale markets, either in a point or probabilis-
tic setting. However, given the diversity of trading regula-
tions available across the globe, EPF always has to be tai-
lored to the speciﬁc market. For instance, the workhorse
of European short-term power trading is the day-ahead
market with its once-per-day uniform-price auction, see
Fig. 1. On the other hand, the Australian National Elec-
tricity Market operates as a real-time power pool, where
a dispatch price is determined every ﬁve minutes and six
dispatch prices are averaged every half hour as pool prices
[62], while electricity forward markets share many aspects
with those of other energy commodities (oil, gas, coal),
and quite often are only ﬁnancially settled [63].
2

Day dDay d – 1
Bidding for
day d
Prices for 24h of day d
Bidding for
day d + 1
Figure 1: Illustration of the day-ahead auction market, where whole-
sale sellers and buyers submit their bids before gate closure on day
d − 1 for the delivery of electricity during day d; the 24 hourly prices
for day d are set simultaneously, typically around midday.
As the ﬁeld of EPF is very diverse, a complete litera-
ture review is out of the scope of this paper. Instead, this
section is intended to provide an overview of the the three
families of methods, i.e. statistical, ML, and hybrid meth-
ods, proposed for point forecasting in day-ahead markets
since 2014, i.e. since the last comprehensive literature re-
view of Weron [5]. The more recent reviews either focused
on short-terk [6] and medium-/long-term [7] probabilistic
EPF, were not that comprehensive in scope [64, 65], or
concerned electricity derivatives [63]. Furthermore, our
survey puts a special emphasis on DL and hybrid meth-
ods as this is the area of EPF characterized by the most
rapid development and, at the same time, troubled by non-
rigorous empirical studies which motivated us to write this
paper in the ﬁrst place.
2.1. Statistical methods
Most models in this class rely on linear regression and
represent the dependent (or output) variable, i.e. the price
pd,h for dayd and hourh, by a linear combination of inde-
pendent (or predictor, explanatory) variables, also called
regressors, inputs, or features:
pd,h = θhXd,h +εd,h, (1)
where θh = [θh,0,θ h,1,...,θ h,n] is a row vector of coeﬃcients
speciﬁc to hour h, Xd,h = [1,X 1
d,h,...,X n
d,h]⊤ is a column
vector of inputs and εd,h is an error term; the intercept
θh,0 can be set to zero if the data is demeaned beforehand.
Note that here we are using a notation common in day-
ahead forecasting, which emphasizes the vector structure
of these price series, see Fig. 1. Alternatively we could
use single indexing: pt with t = 24d +h. Although the
multivariate modeling framework has been shown to be
marginally more accurate than the univariate counterpart,
both approaches have their pros and cons [57, 66].
In the last few years, there have been several key con-
tributions in the ﬁeld of statistical methods for EPF. Ar-
guably, the most relevant of them has been the appear-
ance of linear regression models with a large number of in-
put features that utilize regularization techniques [56, 67].
Classically, the regression model in (1) is estimated using
ordinary least squares (OLS) by minimizing the residual
sum of squares (RSS), i.e. squared diﬀerences between the
predicted and actual values. However, if the number of
regressors is large, using the least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator (LASSO) [56] or its generalization the
elastic net [67] as implicit feature selection methods have
been shown to improved the forecating results [55, 57–
59, 68, 69]. In particular, by jointly minimizing the RSS
and a penalty factor of the model parameters (see Sec-
tion 4.2 for details), these two implicit regularization tech-
niques set some of the parameters to zero and thus ef-
fectively eliminate redundant regressors. As shown in the
cited studies [55, 57–59, 68, 69], these parameter-rich2 reg-
ularized regression models exhibit superior performance.
It is important to note that such an approach, called here
Lasso Estimated AutoRegressive (LEAR), is in fact hy-
brid since LASSO (and electic nets) are considered ML
techniques by some authors. However, we classify it as
statistical because the underlying model is autoregressive.
Aside from proposing parameter-rich models and ad-
vanced estimators, researchers have also improved the
ﬁeld by considering a variety of additional preprocessing
techniques. Most notably, models using so-called vari-
ance stabilizing transformations [9, 57, 70, 71] and long-
term seasonal components [72–75] have been proposed and
shown to result in statistically signiﬁcant improvements.
However, the applicability of these two techniques varies
greatly: due to very common occurrence of price spikes,
variance stabilizing transformations have become a stan-
dard and replaced the commonly used logarithmic trans-
formation (no longer applicable due to zeros and negative
values3) to normalize electricity prices. By contrast, the
applicability of long-term seasonal components has been
more limited and it is unknown whether their beneﬁcial
eﬀect is limited to relatively parsimonious regression mod-
els or also holds for parameter-rich models.
A third innovation in the ﬁeld is an ensemble, i.e. a
method that combines individual forecasting models to en-
hance the accuracy, that combines multiple forecasts of the
same model calibrated on diﬀerent windows. In this con-
text, two diﬀerent studies [76, 77] showed that the best
results are obtained with a combination of a few short
(spanning 1-4 months) and a few long calibration windows
(of approximately two years). Said ensembles were able to
signiﬁcantly outperform predictions obtained for the best
ex-post selected calibration window [76, 77]. But again, it
has not been shown to date whether this eﬀect is limited
to relatively parsimonious regression models or also holds
for LEAR models.
2We deﬁne a parameter-rich linear model as a model with multiple
regressors.
3The logarithmic of 0 or a negative value is undeﬁned.
3

2.2. Deep learning
In the last ﬁve years, a total of 28 deep learning papers
in the context of EPF have been published 4. Moreover,
this number has been steadily increasing: while in 2016
there was only one paper and in 2017 none, in 2018 there
were 11, and in 2019 there were 16. Despite this trend,
most of the published studies are very limited: the com-
parisons are too simplistic, e.g. avoid state-of-the-art sta-
tistical methods, and their results cannot be generalized.
The ﬁrst published DL paper [12] proposes a deep learn-
ing network using stacked denoising autoencoders. The
paper, despite being the ﬁrst, provides a better evaluation
than most studies: the new method is compared not only
against machine learning techniques but also against two
statistical methods. Yet, the evaluation is limited as it is
done considering three months of test data and employing
simple models for comparison. In the second published
DL paper [43], a DNN for modeling market integration
is proposed. While the method is evaluated over a year
of data, the study is also limited as the proposed model is
not compared against other machine learning or statistical
methods.
In the third published paper [59], four DL models (a
DNNs, two recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and a con-
volutional network (CNN) ) are proposed. This study is,
to the best of our knowledge, the most complete study up
to date. In particular, the proposed DL models are com-
pared using a whole year of data against a benchmark of
23 diﬀerent models, including 7 machine learning models,
15 statistical methods, a commercial software. Moreover,
among the statistical methods, the comparison includes
the fARX-Lasso and fARX-EN, i.e. the state-of-the-art
statistical methods. While the study shows the superi-
ority of the DL algorithms, very strong conclusions are
not possible as the study only considers a single market.
The studies that followed in 2018 focused on one of three
topics: 1) evaluating the performance of diﬀerent deep re-
current networks [13, 23, 37, 78]; 2) proposing new hybrid
methods based on CNNs and LSTMs [14, 44, 79, 80]; or
3) employing regular DNN models [23]. Independently of
the focus, they were all more limited than the ﬁrst and the
third studies [12, 59] as they failed to compare the new DL
models with state-of-the-art statistical methods and/or to
employ long enough datasets to derive strong conclusions.
4This data is based on two searches in Scopus looking for keywords
in the title, abstract, and keywords. The ﬁrst search is based on the
following query TITLE-ABS-KEY(((("forecasting electricity")
OR ("predicting electricity")) AND (("electricity spot")
OR ("electricity day-ahead") OR ("electricity price")))
OR ((("price forecasting") OR ("price prediction")
OR ("forecasting price") OR ("predicting price") OR
("forecasting spikes") OR ("forecasting VAR")) AND
(("electricity spot price") OR ("electricity price") OR
("electricity market") OR ("day-ahead market") OR ("power
market"))) AND ("deep") AND ("learning")) . The second search
is very similar but replacing ("deep") AND ("learning") by
("neural") AND ("network") .
In detail, [13] studies the use of RNNs for forecasting
electricity prices but the comparison is done in a sin-
gle market and against simple statistical methods (a sea-
sonal auto regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA)
model, a Markov regime-switching model, and a self ex-
citing threshold model). Moreover, while the comparison
includes other DL methods, it avoids comparison with sim-
pler ML techniques. Ref. [44] proposes a hybrid DL meth-
ods composed of a CNN and a long short-term memory
(LSTM) (a type of recurrent network) for forecasting bal-
ancing prices. However, the new model is only compared
against simple ML benchmarks and the evaluation is done
using diﬀerent periods comprising three months for train-
ing and 1 month for testing. Similarly, [14] proposes an-
other hybrid model combining a CNN and an LSTM, but
the model is only compared against two naive statistical
methods: an auto regressive moving average (ARMA) and
a generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity
(GARCH) model.
In [23] a regular DNN model is proposed but the model
is only evaluated on a test dataset comprising a single day
and compared against a simple MLP. In [29], the use of
an LSTM model for EPF is evaluated, but the method is
only compared with three neural networks and a simple
statistical method, and the evaluation is done using only
4 weeks of data. Likewise, [78] proposes a model based on
an LSTM but a comparison against other methods is not
done and the test dataset only comprises 2 weeks of data.
In [37], another LSTM model is proposed but, as other
studies, the test dataset comprises some months of data
and the method is only compared against a simple decision
tree and a support vector regressor; moreover, the exact
split between the training and test dataset is not speciﬁed
and it is unclear what is exactly the performance of the
model. An exception to these studies is [81] which proposes
a series of DL models and compares them for a year of
data against several advanced statistical methods such as
LASSO and a simpler ML method. The main drawbacks
of the study are that it is based on a single market and that
it only considers a simple ML method as a benchmark. In
addition, the study focuses on intraday electricity prices,
while most of the literature (including the current paper)
considers forecasting day-ahead electricity prices.
In 2019, the main focus of the papers was the same as in
2018: 1) evaluating the performance of diﬀerent deep re-
current networks (mostly LSTMs) [16, 30, 45, 47, 82–84],
2) proposing new hybrid deep learning methods usually
based on LSTMs and CNNs [17, 28, 36, 82, 85–87], or 3)
employing regular DNN models [15, 46, 88]. Similarly, as
with most studies in 2018, the new studies were more lim-
ited than [12, 59] as no comparisons with state-of-the-art
statistical methods were made and long test datasets were
seldom used. In this context, even though some studies
[16, 88] tried to compare the proposed methods with ex-
isting DL models [59], they either failed to re-estimated
the benchmark models for the new case study [16] or they
overﬁtted the DL benchmark models [88].
4

In detail, [30] proposes diﬀerent LSTM models but the
new models are only compared against 5 other ML tech-
niques and using a test period of 4 weeks. In [28], a CNN
model is proposed but the new model is just compared
against three simple ML methods and using a test dataset
that comprises a week. In [45], a model based on an LSTM
is proposed but it is only compared against three simple
ML methods and for a period of 12 weeks. In [46], the per-
formance of a DNN is compared to that of an SVR model
and, as the comparison only includes these two models, it
is obviously very limited. In [15], a DNN is used as part of
a two-step forecasting method; as in many other studies,
the comparison is performed for one month of data and
limited to two simple ML models (a SVR and an MLP)
and a standard linear model. In [47], two DL models are
proposed but the models are only compared to very sim-
ple ML methods (extreme learning machines and standard
MLPs) and using a test dataset spanning eight months. In
[16], a bidirectional LSTM to forecast prices in the French
market is proposed; however, the study only considers his-
torical prices as input features and the proposed method
is only compared against DL models and a simple autore-
gressive model. In addition, the benchmark DL models
are copied from [59] (a completely diﬀerent case study that
considers exogenous inputs and a diﬀerent market) with-
out re-tuning the hyperparameters to the new case study.
In [88], a neural network that uses data from order books
is proposed and compared against DL methods from the
literature, e.g. the ones proposed in [59]. While the new
model outperforms existing DL methods, the DL meth-
ods from the literature are trained to overﬁt the training
dataset5. Therefore, the comparison is not meaningful (the
DL benchmark models will necessarily perform poorly in
the test dataset) and it cannot be assessed how the new
model performs. In [85], a hybrid DL forecasting method is
proposed based on stacked denoising autoencoders for pre-
training, regular autoencodes for feature selection, and a
rough DNN as a forecasting method. As other studies, the
method is only compared against other simpler ML mod-
els. Moreover, the importance of each of the four modules
of the hybrid method is not studied and the study does
not re-calibrate the models with new data: the models are
trained once and evaluated during a whole year. Simi-
larly, [86] proposes a CNN hybrid model that uses mutual
information, random forests, grey correlation analysis, and
recursive feature elimination for feature selection. Unlike
most models, the algorithm is trained to classify prices in-
stead of predicting their scalar values; however, details of
5In the training dataset, the proposed model and some naive ML
benchmark models yield a root mean square error in the order of 6.
For the test dataset, for the same models, that error is between 9
and 12. By contrast, the training error of the benchmark DL model
is 2, and the test error is 20. Having a training error that is 1/3
of the error of other models but a test error that is 10 times larger
than the training error is a clear sign for overﬁtting (especially when
for the rest of the models the test error is just 1.5 larger than the
training error).
how this process is done are not provided. In addition,
the method is only compared against simpler ML meth-
ods and evaluated for less than a year of data (the study
uses 1 year for testing and training but the split is not
speciﬁed). Likewise, [36] proposes a hybrid model based
on CNNs and RNNs in the context of microgrids; as other
studies, the method is evaluated in a small dataset, it is
not compared against state-of-the-art statistical methods,
and the exact split between training and test datasets is
not speciﬁed.
2.3. Hybrid methods
Within the ﬁeld of EPF, the research area that has re-
ceived most attention in the last 5 years has been hybrid
forecasting methods. In this time frame, more than 100 ar-
ticles proposing new hybrid methods have been published6,
i.e. approximately 5 times more than articles based on DL.
Hybrid models are very complex forecasting frameworks
that are composed of several algorithms. Usually, they
comprise at least two of the following ﬁve modules:
• An algorithm for decomposing data.
• An algorithm for feature selection.
• An algorithm to cluster data.
• One or more forecasting models whose predictions are
combined.
• Some type of heuristic optimization algorithm to ei-
ther estimate the models or their hyperparameters.
In terms of decomposition methods, the most widely
used technique is the wavelet transform [17, 19, 22, 24, 34,
41, 49, 51, 52, 89]. Alternatives methods include empirical
mode decomposition [32, 90], variational mode decompo-
sition [27, 48], and singular spectrum analysis [91, 92].
For feature selection, the most commonly used algo-
rithms are correlation analysis [32, 41, 42, 93, 94] and the
mutual information technique [18, 42, 52, 95–97]. Other
algorithms include classiﬁcation and regression trees with
recursive feature elimination [50] or Relief-F [50].
For clustering data, the algorithms are usually based on
one of the following four: k-means [26, 98], self-organizing
maps [19, 26, 99], enhanced game theoretic clustering [26],
or fuzzy clustering [52, 100]
The selection of forecasting models is much more di-
verse. The most widely used method is the standard
6This data is based on two searches in Scopus looking for keywords
in the title, abstract, and keywords. The ﬁrst search is based on the
following query TITLE-ABS-KEY(((forecast*) OR (predict*)) AND
(electricity) AND (price*) AND (hybrid)) . The second search
is very similar but replacing the keyword hybrid by neural AND
network. Note that, while this search is not as complete as the
one for DL, it provides enough material for building an overview of
the state of the ﬁeld.
5

MLP [19, 20, 32, 41, 42, 51, 91, 92, 94, 96, 97], fol-
lowed by the adaptive network-based fuzzy inference sys-
tem (ANFIS) [19, 90, 95], radial basis function network
[20, 24, 100], and autoregressive models like ARMA or
ARIMA [20, 22, 24, 90]. Other models include LSTM [17],
linear regression [50], extreme learning machine [22, 50],
CNN [50], Bayesian neural network [26, 99], exponential
GARCH [90], echo state neural network [27], Elman neu-
ral networks [18], and support vector regressors [20]. It is
important to note that in many of the approaches, the hy-
brid method does not consider a single forecasting model
but combines several of them [19, 20, 24, 50, 90, 97].
Just as for the forecasting model, the diversity of the
heuristic optimization algorithms is also large. While
the most often utilized algorithm is particle swarm op-
timization [22, 48, 51, 95, 96, 100], many other approaches
are also used: diﬀerential evolution [27], genetic algo-
rithm [95], backtracking search [95], deterministic anneal-
ing [100], bat algorithm [41], vaporization precipitation-
based water cycle algorithm [93], cuckoo search [92, 94],
or honey bee mating optimization [24].
In spite of the large number of published works, the
research in hybrid methods suﬀers from the same problems
as discussed earlier. First, most of the studies either avoid
comparison with well-established methods [18–21, 25, 27,
34, 42, 48–50, 90, 93, 95, 100] or resort to comparisons
using outdated methodologies [22, 24, 26, 41, 51, 52, 91,
92]. Hence, the accuracy of the new proposed methods
cannot be accurately established.
Second, the considered studies usually employ very
small datasets consisting either of a few days [17–22] or a
few weeks [18, 19, 22, 24–27, 41, 42, 49, 51, 91–93, 95, 100].
Thus, drawing conclusions is nearly impossible and it is
unclear whether the accuracy results are just the outcome
of selecting a convenient test period.
Besides these two problems, for many hybrid methods
the eﬀect of selecting variants of the diﬀerent hybrid com-
ponents is not analyzed [20, 21, 24, 25, 27, 41, 42, 50–
52, 91, 92]. Thus, it is not clear how relevant or useful the
individual components are.
2.4. State-of-the-art models
Because of the described problems when comparing EPF
models, it is very hard to establish what are the state-
of-the-art methods. Nevertheless, considering the stud-
ies performed in the last years, it can be argued that the
LEAR is a very accurate (if not the most accurate) linear
model. Moreover, it can also be argued that the accuracy
of this model can be further improved by transforming the
prices using variance stabilizing transformations, combin-
ing forecasts obtained for diﬀerent calibration windows,
and/or using long-term seasonal decomposition.
For the case of ML models, the selection is harder as the
existing comparisons are of worse quality. Considering the
most complete benchmark study in terms of forecasting
models [59], it seems that a simple DNN with two layers
is one of the best ML models. In particular, while more
complex models, e.g. LSTMs, could potentially be more
accurate, there is at the moment no sound evidence to
validate this claim.
In the case of hybrid models, establishing what is the
best model is an impossible task. Firstly, while many hy-
brid methods have been proposed, they have not been com-
pared with each other nor with the LEAR or DNN models.
Secondly, as most studies do not evaluate the individual
inﬂuence of each hybrid component, it is also impossible to
establish the best algorithms for each hybrid component,
e.g. it is unclear what are the best clustering, feature se-
lection method, or data decomposition methods.
With that in mind, we will consider the LEAR and the
DNN for the proposed open-access benchmark. In partic-
ular, not only are these two methods highly accurate, but
they are also relatively simple. As such, we think that
they are the best benchmarks to compare new complex
EPF forecasting methods with.
3. Open-access benchmark dataset
The ﬁrst contribution of the paper is to provide a large
open-access benchmark dataset on which new methods can
be tested, together with the day-ahead forecasts of the pro-
posed open-access methods. In this section, we introduce
this dataset, which can be accessed 7 using the python li-
brary built for this study.
3.1. General characteristics
For a benchmark dataset in EPF to be fair it should sat-
isfy three conditions: 1) comprise several electricity mar-
kets so that the capabilities of new models can be tested
under diﬀerent conditions, 2) be long enough so that algo-
rithms can be analyzed using out-of-sample datasets that
span 1-2 years, and 3) be recent enough to include price
eﬀects due to the integration of RES.
Based on these conditions, we propose ﬁve datasets rep-
resenting ﬁve diﬀerent day-ahead electricity markets, each
of them comprising 6 years of data. The prices of each
market have very distinct dynamics, i.e. they all have dif-
ferences in terms of the frequency and existence of negative
prices, zeros prices, and price spikes. In addition, as elec-
tricity prices depend on exogenous variables, each dataset
comprises two additional time series: day-ahead forecasts
of two inﬂuential exogenous factors that diﬀer from each
market. The length of each dataset equals 2184 days,
which translates to six years of 364 days or 6 × 52 = 312
weeks8. All available time series are saved using the lo-
cal time, and the daylight savings are treated by either
7Note that we do not own the data in the dataset. However, it
can be freely accessed from diﬀerent websites, e.g. the ENTSO-E
transparency platform [101]. In this context, the proposed python
library [60, 61] provides an interface to easily access the data.
8Electricity prices have weekly seasonality. Thus, by approximat-
ing a year by 52 weeks because we ensure that the metrics are not
oﬀset because a certain day, e.g. Monday, is harder to predict than
the others.
6

arithmetically averaging two values from the extra hour
or interpolating the neighboring values for the missing ob-
servation.
3.2. Nord Pool
The ﬁrst dataset represents the Nord Pool (NP), i.e.
the European power market of the Nordic countries, and
spans from 01.01.2013 to 24.12.2018. The dataset contains
hourly observations of day-ahead prices, the day-ahead
load forecast, and the day-ahead wind generation forecast.
The dataset was constructed using the data freely avail-
able on the webpage of the Nordic power exchange Nord
Pool [54]. Figure 2 (top) displays the electricity price time
series of the dataset; as can be seen, the prices are always
positives, zero prices are rare, and prices spikes seldom
occur.
3.3. PJM
The second dataset is obtained from the Pennsylvania-
New Jersey-Maryland (PJM) market in the United States.
It covers the same data points as Nord Pool, i.e. from
01.01.2013 to 24.12.2018. The three time series are: the
zonal prices in the Commonwealth Edison (COMED) (a
zone located in the state of Illinois) and two day-ahead
load forecast series, one describing the system load and
the second one the COMED zonal load. The data is freely
available on the PJM’s website [102]. Figure 2 (bottom)
represents the electricity price time series of the dataset;
as with the NP market, the prices are always positive and
zero prices are rare; however, unlike with the prices in the
NP market, spikes appear frequently.
3.4. EPEX-BE
The third dataset represents the EPEX-BE market, the
day-ahead electricity market in Belgium, which is oper-
ated by EPEX SPOT. The dataset spans from 09.01.2011
to 31.12.2016. The two exogenous data series represent the
day-ahead load forecast and the day-ahead generation fore-
cast in France. While this selection might be surprising, it
has been shown [43] that these two are the best predictors
of Belgian prices. The price data is freely available in the
ENTSO-E transparency platform [101] and the ELIA web-
site [103], and the load and generation day-ahead forecasts
are freely available in [104]. It is important to note that
this dataset is particularly interesting because it is harder
to predict. Figure 3 (top) shows the electricity price time
series of the dataset; unlike the prices in the PJM and
NP markets, negative prices and zero prices appear more
frequently, and price spikes are very common.
3.5. EPEX-FR
The fourth dataset represents the EPEX-FR market,
the day-ahead electricity market in France, which is also
operated by EPEX SPOT. The dataset spans the same
period as the EPEX-BE dataset, i.e. from 09.01.2011 to
31.12.2016. Besides the electricity prices, the dataset com-
prises the day-ahead load forecast and the day-ahead gen-
eration forecast. As before, the price data is freely ob-
tained from the ENTSO-E transparency platform [101],
and the load and generation day-ahead forecasts are freely
available on the webpage of RTE [104], i.e. the transmis-
sion system operator (TSO) in France. Figure 3 (middle)
displays the electricity price time series of the dataset; as
in the EPEX-BE market, negative prices, zero prices, and
spikes are very common.
3.6. EPEX-DE
The last dataset describes the EPEX-DE market, the
German electricity market, which is also operated by
EPEX SPOT. The dataset spans from 09.01.2012 to
31.12.2017. Besides the prices, the dataset comprises the
day-ahead zonal load forecast in the TSO Amprion zone
and the aggregated day-ahead wind and solar generation
forecasts in the zones of the 3 largest 9 TSOs (Amprion,
TenneT, and 50Hertz). The price data is freely obtained
from the ENTSO-E transparency platform [101], the zonal
load day-ahead forecasts is freely available in the web-
site of Amprion [105], and the wind and solar forecasts
in the websites of Amprion [105], 50Hertz [106], and Ten-
neT [107]. Figure 3 (bottom) displays the electricity price
time series of the dataset; as can be seen, while negative
and zero prices occur more often than in the other four
markets, price spikes are more rare.
3.7. Training and testing periods
For each dataset, the testing period is deﬁned as the
last 104 weeks, i.e. the last two years, of the dataset. The
exact dates of the testing datasets are deﬁned in Table 1.
Table 1: Start and end dates of the testing (out-of-sample) datasets
for each electricity market.
Market T est period
Nord pool 27.12.2016 – 24.12.2018
PJM 27.12.2016 – 24.12.2018
EPEX-FR 04.01.2015 – 31.12.2016
EPEX-BE 04.01.2015 – 31.12.2016
EPEX-DE 04.01.2016 – 31.12.2017
It is important to note that, as we will argue in Section 5,
selecting two years as the testing period is paramount to
ensure good research practices in EPF.
Unlike the testing dataset, the training dataset cannot
be deﬁned as it will vary between diﬀerent models. In,
general, the training dataset will comprise any data that is
prior to the data under study. However, the exact data will
change depending on two concepts, i.e. calibration window
and recalibration:
9There are 4 TSOs in Germany.
7

2013.01.01 2014 .01.01 2015 .01.01 2015 .12.29 2017 .01.01 2018 .01.01 2018 .12.24
−200
0
200
400
600
800
Price [EUR/MWh]
Nord Pool
2013.01.01 2014 .01.01 2015 .01.01 2015 .12.29 2017 .01.01 2018 .01.01 2018 .12.24
−200
0
200
400
600
800
Price [USD/MWh]
PJM
Figure 2: Electricity prices time series for two of the ﬁve datasets, i.e. Nord Pool and PJM, considered in the open-access benchmark dataset
(Note that each dataset also includes two exogenous time series that are not plotted here).
• While there are four years of data available for es-
timating the model, it might be desirable to employ
only recent data, e.g. to avoid estimating eﬀects that
no longer play a role. The amount of past data em-
ployed for estimation deﬁnes the calibration window.
• The model can be estimated once and then evaluated
for the full test dataset, or it can be continuously re-
calibrated on daily basis to incorporate the input of
recent data.
For example, let us consider predicting the prices in the
NP on 15.02.2017. A model using a calibration window
of 52 weeks and no recalibration would employ a train-
ing dataset comprising the data between 29.12.2016 and
26.12.2016, i.e. one year prior to the start of the test pe-
riod. By contrast, a model using a calibration window of
104 weeks and daily recalibration would employ the data
between 18.02.2015 and 14.02.2017.
4. Open-access benchmark models
The second contribution of the paper is to provide a
set of state-of-the-art open-source forecasting methods as
an open-source python toolbox. As explained in Section
2.4, the LEAR [55] and the DNN [59] models are not only
highly accurate but also relatively simple. Therefore, we
implement these two methods and provide their code freely
available as part of the proposed toolbox [60, 61]. It is
important to note that the use of the proposed open-access
methods is fully documented and automated so researchers
can test and use them without expert knowledge.
For the sake of simplicity, the description provided here
is limited to the bare minimum. For further details on the
two models we refer to the original papers [55, 59].
4.1. Input features
Before describing each model, let us deﬁne the input
features that are considered. Independently of the model,
the available input features to forecast the 24 day-ahead
prices of day d, i.e. pd = [pd,1,...,p d,24]⊤, are the same:
• Historical day-ahead prices of the previous three days
and one week ago, i.e. pd−1, pd−2, pd−3, pd−7.
• The day-ahead forecasts of the two variables of in-
terest (see Section 3 for details) for day d avail-
able on day d− 1, i.e. x1
d = [x1
d,1,...,x 1
d,24]⊤ and
x2
d = [x2
d,1,...,x 2
d,24]⊤; note that the variables of in-
terest are diﬀerent for each market.
• Historical day-ahead forecasts of the variables of in-
terest the previous day and one week ago, i.e. x1
d−1,
x1
d−7, x2
d−1, x2
d−7.
• A dummy variable zd that represents the day of the
week. In the case of the linear model, following
the standard practice in the literature [55, 58, 77],
8

2011.01.09 2012 .01.09 2013 .01.08 2014 .01.05 2015 .01.09 2016 .01.09 2016 .12.31
−200
0
200
400
600
800
Price [EUR/MWh]
EPEX-BE
2011.01.09 2012 .01.09 2013 .01.08 2014 .01.05 2015 .01.09 2016 .01.09 2016 .12.31
−200
0
200
400
600
800
Price [EUR/MWh]
EPEX-FR
2012.01.09 2013 .01.08 2014 .01.08 2015 .01.05 2016 .01.09 2017 .01.08 2017 .12.31
−200
0
200
400
600
800
Price [EUR/MWh]
EPEX-DE
Figure 3: Electricity prices time series for three of the ﬁve datasets, i.e. EPEX-BE, EPEX-FR, and EPEX-DE, considered in the open-access
benchmark dataset (Note that each dataset also includes two exogenous time series that are not plotted here). The EPEX-BE and EPEX-FR
time series are similar because the EPEX-FR and EPEX-BE are highly coupled markets [43]. To keep the plots readable, the upper limit of
the y-axis is below the maximum price; this only aﬀects one spike in EPEX-FR and another one in EPEX-BE.
this is a binary vector z = [zd,1,...,z d,7]⊤ that en-
codes every day of the week by setting all elements
to zero except the element that identiﬁes the day of
the week, e.g. [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] represents Monday and
[0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] Tuesday. In the case of the neural net-
work, for the sake of simplicity, the day of the week
is modeled with a multi-value input zd∈{ 1,..., 7}.
In total, we consider a total of 247 available input fea-
tures for each LEAR model and 241 input features for each
DNN model. It is important to note that, while the avail-
able input features are the same, each method performs a
diﬀerent feature selection procedure:
• Each of the LEAR models ﬁnds the optimal set of fea-
tures using LASSO as an embedded feature selection,
i.e. each of the models uses L1-regularization to select
among the 247 features.
• For the DNN, as in the original study [59], the input
features are optimized together with the hyperparam-
eters using the tree Parzen estimator [108] (see Section
4.3 for details).
In both cases, the feature selection is fully automated and
does not require expert intervention.
4.2. The LEAR model
The ﬁrst model is the LEAR model [55], a parameter-
rich ARX model estimated using LASSO as an implicit fea-
ture selection approach. To enhance the model as shown
by [9], the data is preprocessed with the arc hyperbolic
9

sine (asinh) variance stabilizing transformation. Long-
term seasonal decomposition is not considered for the sake
of simplicity; particularly, while it has been shown to fur-
ther improve the performance of the LEAR, we leave it
out for future research.
As in [77], to further enhance the model, we recalibrated
daily over diﬀerent calibration window lengths: 8 weeks,
12 weeks, 3 years, and 4 years. We consider short win-
dows (8-12 weeks) in combination with long windows (3-4
years) because it has been empirically shown to lead to
better results [77]. In this context, we consider a mini-
mum of 8 weeks as lower windows might not have enough
information to correctly estimate parameter-rich models
[77].
The LEAR model to predict price pd,h on day d and
hour h is deﬁned by:
pd,h =f(pd−1, pd−2, pd−3, pd−7, xi
d, xi
d−1, xi
d−7, θh) +εd,h
=
24∑
i=1
θh,i·pd−1,i +
24∑
i=1
θh,24+i·pd−2,i
+
24∑
i=1
θh,48+i·pd−3,i +
24∑
i=1
θh,72+i·pd−7,i
+
24∑
i=1
θh,96+i·x1
d,i +
24∑
i=1
θh,120+i·x2
d,i
+
24∑
i=1
θh,144+i·x1
d−1,i +
24∑
i=1
θh,168+i·x2
d−1,i
+
24∑
i=1
θh,192+i·x1
d−7,i +
24∑
i=1
θh,216+i·x2
d−7,i
+
7∑
i=1
θh,240+i·zd,i +εd,h (2)
where θh = [θh,1,...,θ h,247]⊤ are the 247 parameters of
the LEAR model for hour h. Many of these parameters
become zero when (2) is estimated using LASSO:
ˆθh = argmin
θh
{RSS +λ∥θh∥1}
= argmin
θh
{
RSS +λ
247∑
i=1
|θh,i|
}
, (3)
where RSS = ∑Nd
d=8(pd,h− ˆpd,h)2 is the sum of squares
residuals, ˆpd,h the price forecast, Nd is the number of days
in the training dataset, and λ≥ 0 is the tuning (or reg-
ularization) hyperparameter of LASSO. Due to the com-
putational speed of estimating with LASSO, during every
daily recalibration, the hyperparameter λ that regulates
the L 1 penalty is optimized. This can be done using an
ex-ante cross-validation procedure [109]. In this study, to
further reduce the computational cost, we propose an eﬃ-
cient hybrid approach to perform the optimal selection of
λ. See Section 4.2.2 for details.
4.2.1. Regularization hyperparameter
The hyperparameter λ of LASSO can be optimized in
multiple ways, each one of them with diﬀerent merits and
disadvantages. A ﬁrst approach is to optimize λ once and
then keep it ﬁxed for the whole test period. Although it
requires very low computation costs, the limitation of this
approach is that it assumes that the hyperparameter λ
does not change over time. This assumption might hin-
der the performance of the estimator as the regularization
parameter does not change even when the market might
do.
A second approach is to recalibrate the hyperparameter
on a periodic basis using a validation dataset. Although
this method yields good results, tuning the recalibration
frequency and calibration window is complicated, the com-
putational cost is large, and the results may vary between
datasets [58].
A third option is to recalibrate the hyperparameter pe-
riodically, but using cross-validation (CV): splitting the
data into disjoint partitions, using each possible partition
once as a test dataset with the remaining data as the
training dataset, and selecting the hyperparameter that
performs the best across all partitions [109]. Although
this approach is highly accurate, its computation costs are
very large.
A fourth option is to periodically update the hyperpa-
rameter but using information criteria, e.g. the Akaike in-
formation criterion (AIC) or the Bayesian information cri-
terion [57, 69, 110]. As before, this involves training multi-
ple LASSO models to compute the information criteria for
each possible hyperparameter value, which in turn leads
to a high computational cost.
Lastly, one can use the least angle regression (LARS)
LASSO [111] for estimating the model instead of the coor-
dinate descent implementation. This estimation procedure
has the advantage of computing the whole LASSO solution
path, which in turn allows to compute the information cri-
teria or perform CV much faster.
4.2.2. Selecting the regularization hyperparameter
To select λ we propose a hybrid approach. On a daily
basis, we estimate the hyperparameter using the LARS
method with the in-sample AIC. Then, using the optimalλ
obtained from the LARS method, we recalibrate the LEAR
using the traditional coordinate descent implementation.
The reason for proposing this hybrid approach is that
it provides a good trade-oﬀ between computational com-
plexity and accuracy. In particular, it leverages the com-
putational eﬃciency of LARS for ex-ante λ selection with
the predictive performance on short calibration windows
of the coordinate descent LASSO.
It is important to note that we have studied multiple ap-
proaches to select λ: (i) daily recalibration, CV, with co-
ordinate descent; (ii) daily recalibration, CV, with LARS;
(iii) daily recalibration with LARS and AIC. However, the
computational cost of the ﬁrst method was too high (in the
same order of magnitude as the cost of the DNN model),
10

and the accuracy of the other two was not good. By con-
trast, the proposed approach had a performance on par
with coordinate descent LASSO using CV, but with a com-
putational cost that was an order of magnitude lower.
4.3. The DNN model
The second model is the DNN [59], one of the most sim-
ple DL models whose input features and hyperparameters
can be optimized and tailored for each case study without
the need of expert knowledge.
4.3.1. Structure
The DNN is a deep feedforward neural network that con-
tains 4 layers, employs the multivariate framework (single
model with 24 outputs), is estimated using Adam, and its
hyperparameters and input features are optimized using
the tree Parzen estimator [108], i.e. a Bayesian optimiza-
tion algorithm. The DNN model is visualized in Figure
4.
pd−1,1
pd−1,2
...
x2
d,24
z11
z12
z13
...
z1n1
z21
z22
z23
...
z2n2
p1
p2
...
p24
Hidden
layer
Hidden
layerInput
layer
Output
layer
...
Figure 4: Visualization of a sample DNN model
4.3.2. Training dataset
For estimating the hyperparameters, the training
dataset is ﬁxed and comprises the four years prior to the
testing period. For evaluating the testing dataset, the
DNN is recalibrated on a daily basis using a calibration
window of four years.
In all cases, the training dataset is split into a training
and a validation dataset, with the latter being used for two
purposes: performing early stopping [112] to avoid overﬁt-
ting and optimizing hyperparameters/features. While the
validation dataset alwawys comprises 42 weeks, the split
between the training and validation datasets depends on
whether the validation dataset is used for hyperparame-
ter/feature selection or for the recalibration step:
• For estimating the hyperparameters, as the validation
dataset is used to guide the optimization process, the
validation dataset is selected as the last 42 weeks of
the training dataset. This is done to keep the training
and validation datasets completely independent and
to avoid overﬁtting10.
• For the testing phase, as the validation dataset is only
used for early stopping, it is deﬁned by randomly se-
lecting 42 weeks out of the total 208 weeks employed
for training. This is done to ensure that the dataset
used for optimizing the DNN parameters includes up-
to-date data11.
As example, let us consider the training and evaluation
of a DNN in the Nord Pool market. Before evaluating
the DNN, the hyperparameter and features of the DNN
are optimised. For that, the employed dataset comprises
the data between 01.01.2013 and 26.12.2016, of which
the training dataset represents the ﬁrst 166 weeks, i.e.
01.01.2013 to 07.03.2016, and the validation dataset the
last 42, i.e. 08.03.2016 to 26.12.2016. During the evalua-
tion of the model, i.e. after the hyperparameter and feature
selection, the training and validation datasets comprise the
last four years of data but are randomly suﬄed. For exam-
ple, to evaluate the DNN during 15.02.2017, the training
and validation datasets would represent the data between
20.02.2013 and 14.02.2017, of which 166 randomly selected
weeks would deﬁne the training dataset and the remaining
42 the validation dataset.
4.3.3. Hyperparameter and feature selection
As in the original DNN paper [59], the hyperparameters
and input features are optimized together using the tree-
structured Parzen estimator [108], a Bayesian optimization
algorithm based on sequential model-based optimization.
To do so, the features are modeled as hyperparameters,
with each hyperparameter representing a binary variable
that selects whether or not a speciﬁc feature is included in
the model (as explained in [43]). In more detail, to select
which of the 241 available input features are relevant, the
method employs 11 decision variables, i.e. 11 hyperparam-
eters:
• Four binary hyperparameters (1-4) that indicate
whether or not to include the historical day ahead
prices pd−1, pd−2, pd−3, pd−7. The selection is done
per day 12, e.g. the algorithm either selects all the
prices pd−j ofj days ago or it cannot select any price
from day d−j, hence the four hyperparameters.
10Similar as it is done when splitting the dataset between the train-
ing and test dataset.
11For hyperparameter optimization, as the validation dataset rep-
resents the most recent weeks of data, the neural network is trained
with data that is almost one year old. While this is not a big problem
when decididing on the DNN structure, it should be avoided during
testing to ensure that the DNN captures new market eﬀects.
12This is done for the sake of simplicity to speed up the optimiza-
tion procedure of the feature selection. In particular, an alternative
could be to use a binary hyperparameter for each individual histor-
ical prices; however, is most markets, that would mean using 24 as
many hyperparameters as there are 24 diﬀerent prices per day.
11

• Two binary hyperparameters (5-6) that indicate
whether or not to include each of the day-ahead fore-
casts x1
d and x2
d. As with the past prices, this is done
for the whole day, i.e. a hyperparameter either selects
all the elements in xj
d or none.
• Four binary hyperparameters (7-10) that indicate
whether or not to include the historical day-ahead
forecasts x1
d−1, x2
d−1, x1
d−7, and x2
d−7. This selection
is also done per day.
• One binary hyperparameter (11) that indicates
whether or not to include the variablezd representing
the day of the week.
In short, 10 binary hyperparameters indicating whether or
not to include 24 inputs each and another binary hyper-
parameter indicating whether or not to include a dummy
variable.
Besides selecting the features, the algorithm also opti-
mizes eight additional hyperparameters: 1) the number
of neurons per layer, 2) the activation function, 3) the
dropout rate, 4) the learning rate, 5) whether or not to
use batch normalization, 6) the type of data preprocessing
technique, 7) the initialization of the DNN weights, and 8)
the coeﬃcient for L1 regularization that is applied to each
layer’s kernel.
Unlike the weights of the DNN that are recalibrated on a
daily basis, the hyperparameter and features are optimized
only once using the four years of data prior to the testing
period. It is important to note that the algorithm runs
for a number T of iterations, where at every iteration the
algorithm infers a potential optimal subset of hyperparam-
eters/features and evaluates this subset in the validation
dataset. For the proposed open-access benchmark mod-
els, T is selected as 1500 iterations to obtain a trade-oﬀ
between accuracy and computational requirements 13.
4.4. Ensembles
For the open-access benchmark, in order to have bench-
mark predictions when evaluating ensemble techniques, we
also proposose ensembles of LEAR and DNNs as open-
access benchmarks of ensembles methods. For the LEAR,
the ensemble is built as the arithmetic average of fore-
casts across four calibration window lengths: 8 weeks, 12
weeks, 3 years, and 4 years. For the DNN, the ensemble
is built as the arithmetic average of four diﬀerent DNNs
that are estimated by running the hyperparameter/feature
selection procedure four times. In particular, the hyperpa-
rameter optimization is asymptotically deterministic, i.e.
the global optimum is found for an inﬁnite number of it-
erations. However, for a ﬁnite number of iterations and
13It can be empirically observed that the performance of the mod-
els barely improves after 1000 iterations. Moreover, performing 1500
iteration takes approximately just one day on a regular quadcore
laptop like the i7-6920HQ, a computation cost very acceptable when
the algorithm has to run only once.
using a diﬀerent initial random seed, the algorithm is non-
deterministic and every run provides a diﬀerent set of hy-
perparameters and features. Although each of these hy-
perparameter/feature subsets represent a local minimum,
it is impossible to establish which of the subsets is bet-
ter as their relative performance on the validation dataset
is nearly identical. This eﬀect can be explained due to
the DNN being a very ﬂexible model and thus diﬀerent
network architectures being able to obtain equally good
results.
4.5. Software implementation
The proposed open-access models are developed
in python: the LEAR is implemented using the
scikit-learn library [113] and the DNN model using the
Keras library [114]. The reason for selecting python is that
it is one of the most widely used programming languages,
especially in the context of ML and statistical inference.
5. Guidelines and best practices in EPF
As motivated in the introduction, the ﬁeld of EPF
suﬀers from several problems that prevent having repro-
ducible research and establishing strong conclusions on
what methods work best. In this section, we outline some
of these issues and provide some guidelines on how to ad-
dress them.
5.1. Length of the test period
A common practice in EPF is to evaluate new methods
on very short test periods. The typical approach is to
evaluate the method on 4 weeks of data [18, 19, 22, 24–
26, 29, 30, 41, 42, 49, 51, 87, 91–96, 99], with each week
representing one of the four seasons in the year. This is
problematic for three reasons:
• Selecting four weeks can lead to cherry-picking the
weeks where a given method excels, e.g. a method
that performs bad with spikes could be evaluated in
a week with fewer spikes, leading in turn to biased
estimations of the forecasting accuracy. While this
is an ethical issue that most researchers would avoid,
establishing four weeks testing periods as the stan-
dard does facilitate the malpractice and it should be
avoided.
• Assuming that the four weeks are randomly selected
and no bias is introduced in the selection, it is still
not possible to guarantee that these four weeks are
representative of the price behavior on a whole year.
Particularly, even within a given season, the price dy-
namics can change dramatically, e.g. during winter
there are weeks with a lot of sun and wind but there
are also weeks without them. Therefore, picking only
a week per season rarely represents the average per-
formance of a forecaster in a give dataset.
12

• There are situations in the electrical grid that do not
occur very often but that can have a very large eﬀect
on electricity prices, e.g. when several power plants
are under maintenance at the same time. Forecasting
methods need to be evaluated under those conditions
to ensure that they are also accurate under extreme
events. By selecting four weeks most of these eﬀects
are neglected.
To avoid this problem, we recommend using a minimum
of one year as a testing period. This ensures that forecast-
ing methods are evaluated considering the complete set
of eﬀects that take place during the year. To guarantee
that all researchers have access to this type of data, the
open-access benchmark dataset that we propose contains
data from several markets and employs a testing period of
two years. In addition, the open-access benchmark can be
directly accessed using the proposed epftoolbox library
[60, 61].
5.2. Benchmark models
A second issue with many EPF publications is that new
methods are not compared with well-established methods
[14, 16, 18–21, 23, 25, 27, 34, 36, 42, 46, 48–50, 78, 90,
93, 95, 100] or resort to comparisons using either outdated
methodologies or simpliﬁed methods [13, 15, 22, 24, 26, 28–
30, 37, 41, 44, 45, 47, 51, 52, 85, 86, 91, 92].
This poses a problem since it becomes very hard to es-
tablish which algorithms work best and which ones do
not. To address this issue, we recommend using well-
established state-of-the-art open-source methods and a
common benchmark dataset. With that in mind, we
have provided and make freely available an open-access
benchmark dataset comprising 5 markets (as described in
Section 3), and we have implemented, thoroughly tested,
and made freely available two state-of-the-art forecasting
methods (as described in Section 4) and their day-ahead
predictions for all 5 datasets over a period of two years
(as described in Section 6). Additionally, we have imple-
mented all these resources in an easy-to-use toolbox [60]
and built an adequate documentation [61].
5.3. Open-access
A third issue in the ﬁeld of EPF is that datasets are
usually not made publicly available and the code of the
proposed methods is not shared. This poses four obvious
problems:
• Research cannot be reproduced as data is not avail-
able. This goes against one of the main principles of
science as all research should be reproducible.
• The progress of EPF research is hindered since it
is hard to establish which methodologies work well.
Consequently, researchers spend unnecessary time re-
evaluating methodologies that have been evaluated al-
ready.
• Comparing new methods with published ones be-
comes very challenging because researchers have to
re-implement methods from the literature. As a re-
sult, comparisons with state-of-the-art methods are
often avoided, and new methods are usually compared
with simple and easy-to-implement methods.
• When new methods are proposed, they cannot be
compared with published methods under the same cir-
cumstances. This leads to comparisons under diﬀer-
ent conditions and opens up the door to wrong im-
plementations of the original methods, which in turn
leads to results that are not correct.
As these problems are critical, we directly try to address
them by providing an open-access benchmark/toolbox
comprising ﬁve datasets, two state-of-the-art methods, and
a set of day-ahead forecasts of the latter two methods. In
addition, we encourage researchers in EPF to share the
developed codes and to either share their datasets or use
an open-access benchmark dataset.
5.4. Evaluation metrics for point forecasts
In the ﬁeld of EPF, the most widely used metrics to
measure the accuracy of point forecasts are the mean ab-
solute error (MAE), the root mean square error (RMSE),
and the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE):
MAE = 1
24Nd
Nd∑
d=1
24∑
h=1
|pd,h− ˆpd,h|, (4)
RMSE =
√ 1
24Nd
Nd∑
d=1
24∑
h=1
(pd,h− ˆpd,h)2, (5)
MAPE = 1
24Nd
Nd∑
d=1
24∑
h=1
|pd,h− ˆpd,h|
|pd,h| , (6)
where pd,h and ˆpd,h respectively represent the real and
forecasted price on dayd and hourh, andNd is the number
of days in the out-of-sample test period, i.e. in the test
dataset.
Since absolute errors are hard to compare between dif-
ferent datasets, the MAE and RMSE are not always very
informative. Moreover, since electricity costs and proﬁts
are often linearly dependent on the electricity prices, met-
rics based on quadratic errors, e.g. RMSE, are hard to
interpret and do not accurately represent the underlying
problem of most forecasting users. In particular, in most
electricity trade applications, the underlying risk, proﬁts,
and costs depend linearly on the price and on the fore-
casting errors. Hence, linear metrics represent better than
quadratic metrics the underlying risks of forecasting er-
rors.
Similarly, since MAPE values become very large with
prices close to zero (regardless of the actual absolute er-
rors), the MAPE is usually dominated by the periods of
13

low prices and is also not very informative. While thesym-
metric mean absolute percentage error (sMAPE) deﬁned14
as:
sMAPE = 1
24Nd
Nd∑
d=1
24∑
h=1
2|pd,h− ˆpd,h|
|pd,h| +|ˆpd,h| (7)
solves some of these issues, it has (as any metric based on
percentage errors) a statistical distribution with undeﬁned
mean and inﬁnite variance [116].
5.4.1. Scaled errors
In this context, several studies advocate for the use of
scaled errors [5, 116, 117], where a scaled error is simply
the MAE scaled by the in-sample MAE of a naive fore-
cast. A scaled error has the nice interpretation of being
lower/larger than one if it is better/worse than the average
naive forecast evaluated in-sample.
A metric based on this concept is the mean absolute
scaled error (MASE), and in the context of one-step ahead
forecasting is deﬁned as [116]:
MASE = 1
N
N∑
k=1
|pk− ˆpk|
1
n−1
∑n
i=2|pin
i −pin
i−1|, (8)
where pin
i is the ith price in the in-sample, i.e. training,
dataset (note that in EPF i = 24d +h), pin
i−1 is the one-
step ahead naive forecast of pin
i , i.e. ˆpin
i , N is the number
of out-of-sample (test) datapoints, and n the number of
in-sample (training) datapoints. For seasonal time series,
the MASE may be deﬁned using the MAE of a seasonal
naive model in the denominator [5, 117].
5.4.2. Relative measures
While scaled errors do indeed solve the issues of more
traditional metrics, they have other associated problems
that make them unsuitable in the context of EPF:
1. As MASE depends on the in-sample dataset, fore-
casting methods with diﬀerent calibration windows
will naturally have to consider diﬀerent in-sample
datasets. As a result, the MASE of each model will
be based on a diﬀerent scaling factor and comparisons
between models cannot be drawn.
2. The same argument applies to models with and with-
out rolling windows. The latter will use a diﬀerent
in-sample dataset at every time point while the for-
mer will keep the in-sample dataset constant.
3. In ensembles of models with diﬀerent calibration win-
dows, the MASE cannot be deﬁned as the calibration
window of the ensemble is undeﬁned.
4. Drawing comparisons across diﬀerent time series is
problematic as electricity prices are not stationary.
For example, an in-sample dataset with spikes and
14Note, that there are multiple versions of sMAPE, here we con-
sider the most sensible one according to [115].
an out-of-sample dataset without spikes will lead to
a smaller MASE than if we consider the same market
but with the in-sample/out-sample datasets reversed.
To solve these issues, we argue that a better metric is
the relative MAE (rMAE) [116]. Similar to MASE, rMAE
normalizes the MAE by the MAE of a naive forecast.
However, instead of considering the in-sample dataset, the
naive forecast is built based on the out-of-sample dataset.
In the context of EPF, rMAE is deﬁned as:
rMAE =
1
24Nd
Nd∑
d=1
24∑
h=1
|pd,h− ˆpd,h|
1
24Nd
Nd∑
d=1
24∑
h=1
|pd,h− ˆpnaive
d,h |
, (9)
where the 1
24Nd
factor cancels out in the numerator and
the denominator. There are three natural choices for the
naive forecasts:
• ˆpnaive,1
d,h =pd−1,h,
• ˆpnaive,2
d,h =pd−7,h,
• ˆpnaive,3
d,h =
{
pd−1,h, if d is Tue, Wed, Thu, or Fri,
pd−7,h, if d is Sat, Sun, or Mon.
In the context of EPF, rMAE using ˆ pnaive,2
d,h = pd−7,h is
arguably the best choice for two reasons: (i) it is easier
to compute than the one based on ˆpnaive,3
d,h and, unlike the
rMAE based on ˆpnaive,1
d,h , it captures weekly eﬀects; (ii)
given a set of forecasting models, the relative ranking of
the accuracy of the models is independent from the naive
benchmark used (see last paragraph of this subsection for
an explanation). Hence, for the remainder of the article
we will use rMAE to explicitly refer to the rMAE based
on ˆpnaive,2
d,h . It is important to note that, similar to rMAE,
one could also deﬁne the relative RMSE (rRMSE) by di-
viding the RMSE of each forecast by the RMSE of a naive
forecast.
Since the dependence on the in-sample dataset is re-
moved, using a rolling window is no longer a problem as
the out-of-sample dataset stays the same. Similarly, mod-
els with diﬀerent calibration windows can be compared and
the rMAE of ensembles is properly deﬁned. Moreover, as
the metric is normalized by the MAE of a naive forecast for
the same sample, the problem with drawing conclusions in
non-stationary time series is mitigated. As before, we can
also deﬁne the rMAE for seasonal time series:
Due to its better properties, rMAE should always be
used to evaluate new methods in EPF. In particular, while
it can be used in conjunction with other metrics, it is im-
portant to include and employ rMAE to obtain more fair
evaluations and comparisons.
With that in mind, the accuracy of the open-access mod-
els in the open-access benchmark dataset is computed con-
sidering rMAE, sMAPE, MAPE, MAE, and RMSE. Then,
14

an analysis of the diﬀerent metrics is provided (see Section
6.4.2). Finally, the forecasts themselves are provided as csv
ﬁles so that the accuracy results can be updated in case
more adequate metrics are developed in the future.
As a ﬁnal remark, let us to note that, given a set of
forecasting models, the relative ranking of the accuracy of
the models is independent from the naive benchmark used
for the rMAE or MASE. Changing it simply changes the
denominator but preserves the numerator, and since the
change in the denominator is the same across all methods,
the relative ranking is preserved. Furthermore, as the nu-
merator is the MAE, it follows that the ranking based on
the rMAE or MASE will be the same as that based on the
MAE.
5.5. Statistical testing
While using adequate metrics to compare the accuracy
of the forecasts is important, it is also necessary to analyze
whether any diﬀerence in accuracy is statistically signiﬁ-
cant. This is paramount to conclude whether the diﬀer-
ence in accuracy does really exist and is not simply due
to random diﬀerences between the forecasts. Despite its
importance, the use of statistical testing has been down-
played in the EPF literature [5]. In particular, most pub-
lications only compare the accuracy in terms of an error
metric and do not analyze the statistical signiﬁcance of the
accuracy diﬀerences. This trend needs to be corrected in
order to compare forecasting approaches with statistical
rigor. Particularly, new studies need to ensure that:
• Any new method is compared against well-established
methods using a statistical test.
• The forecasts of the proposed methods are provided
as open-access datasets. This ensures that, when new
models are proposed, the diﬀerence in accuracy with
the published methods can be analyzed in terms of
statistical testing.
To facilitate statistical testing, we include in the pro-
pose open-source epftoolbox library [60, 61] the two most
widely used statistical tests in EPF, i.e. the Diebold-
Mariano and the Giacomini-White tests.
5.5.1. The Diebold-Mariano test
The Diebold-Mariano (DM) test [118] is probably the
most commonly used tool to evaluate the signiﬁcance of
diﬀerences in forecasting accuracy. It is an asymptotic z-
test of the hypothesis that the mean of the loss diﬀerential
series:
∆A,B
d,h =L(εA
d,h)−L(εB
d,h) (10)
is zero, where εZ
d,h =pd,h− ˆpd,h is the prediction error of
model Z for dayd and hourh, andL(·) is the loss function.
For point forecasts, we usually take L(εZ
d,h) =|εZ
d,h|p with
p = 1 or 2, which corresponds to the absolute and squared
losses, respectively; for probabilistic forecasts,L(·) may be
any strictly proper scoring rule, in particular the pinball
loss, the continuous ranked probability score (CRPS), or
the energy score [6, 65, 66]. Given the loss diﬀerential
series, we compute the statistic:
DM =
√
N ˆµ
ˆσ, (11)
where ˆµ and ˆσ are the sample mean and standard deviation
of ∆ A,B
d,h , respectively, and N is the length of the out-of-
sample test period. Under the assumption of covariance
stationarity of ∆ A,B
d,h , the DM statistic is asymptotically
standard normal, and one- or two-sided asymptotic tail
probabilities can be easily computed.
It is important to note three things. Firstly, the DM test
is model-free, i.e. it compares forecasts (of models), not
models themselves. Secondly, although in the standard
formulation [118] the DM test compares forecasts via the
null hypothesis of the expected loss diﬀerential being zero,
it is more informative to compute the p-values of two one-
sided tests:
1. with the null hypothesis H0 :E(∆A,B
d,h )≤ 0,
2. with the alternative hypothesis null H1 : E(∆A,B
d,h )≥
0.
The lower the p-value15, i.e. the closer it is to zero, the
more the observed data is inconsistent with the null hypo-
htesis. If the p-value is less than the commonly accepted
level of 5%, the null hypothesis is typically rejected. In
the DM test, this means that the forecasts of model B are
signiﬁcantly more accurate than those of model A.
Thirdly, the DM test requires (only) that the loss diﬀer-
ential be covariance stationary.16 This may not be satisﬁed
by forecasts in day-ahead markets, since the predictions for
all 24 hours of the next day are computed at the same time,
using the same information set. Hence, following [65], we
recommend two variants of the DM test in the context of
day-ahead EPF:
• a univariate variant with 24 independent tests per-
formed17, one for each hour of the day, and com-
parisons based on the number of hours for which the
predictions of one model are signiﬁcantly better than
those of another, i.e. the number of hours for which
the null hypothesis is rejected,
• a multivariate variant with the test performed jointly
for all hours using the ‘daily’ or multivariate loss dif-
ferential series:
∆A,B
d =||εA
d||p−||εB
d||p, (12)
15Recall, that the p-value is the probability of obtaining results
(in our case – loss diﬀerentials) at least as large as the ones actually
observed, assuming that the null hypothesis is correct.
16Actually covariance stationarity is suﬃcient but may not be
strictly necessary [119].
17We assume that a day-ahead market has 24 prices. For mar-
kets with prices every half hour, the univariate variant comprises 48
independent tests.
15

where εZ
d is the 24-dimensional vector of prediction
errors of model Z for dayd,||εZ
d||p = (∑24
h=1|εZ
d,h|p)1/p
is the p-th norm of that vector with p = 1 or 2.
The univariate version of the test has the advantage of
providing a deeper analysis as it indicates which forecast
is signiﬁcantly better for which hour of the day [6, 55,
59, 66, 120, 121]. The multivariate version, introduced in
[57], enables a better representation of the results as it
summarizes the comparison in a single p-value, which can
be conveniently visualized using heat maps arranged as
chessboards [9, 10, 58, 76], see Figure 5.
5.5.2. The Giacomini-White test
In some of the more recent EPF studies [77, 122, 123],
the DM test has been replaced by the Giacomini-White
(GW) test [124] for conditional predictive ability. The lat-
ter is preferred because it can be regarded as a general-
ization of the DM test for unconditional predictive ability:
while both tests can be used for nested and non-nested
models18, only the GW test accounts for parameter esti-
mation uncertainty through ‘conditioning’ [65].
Like the DM test, also the GW test has two variants
in day-ahead EPF – the univariate and the multivariate.
Without loss of generality, let us focus on the latter. It
starts by building a multivariate loss diﬀerential series, see
(12), for a pair of forecasts (of models A and B). Next, the
test considers the following regression:
∆A,B
d = φ′Xd−1 +ϵd, (13)
whereXd−1 contains elements from the information set on
dayd−1, i.e. a constant and lags of ∆ A,B
d . Note that ϵd̸=
εZ
d, i.e. ϵd is not the 24-dimensional vector of prediction
errors for day d and model Z but simply an error term in
the regression. Also note that using this notation the DM
test can be written as [125]:
∆A,B
d =µ +ϵd, (14)
i.e. with Xd−1 containing just a constant. Finally, like
for the DM test, to check the signiﬁcance of diﬀerences in
forecasting accuracy, the p-values of two one-sided tests
can be computed. The interpretation and possible visu-
alization (see Figure 5) are analogous to that of the DM
test.
5.6. Recalibration
An issue with many EPF studies is that forecasting mod-
els are not recalibrated. Instead, they are often estimated
once using the training dataset and directly evaluated in
the whole test dataset. This is problematic as it does not
represent real-life conditions where forecasting models are
18This holds as long as the calibration window does not grow with
the sample size [125]. This is satisﬁed for rolling windows, but not
for extended calibration windows.
retrained (often on a daily basis) to account for the latest
market information.
To have models that are evaluated in realistic conditions,
they need to be retrained considering the new incoming
ﬂow of market information. As an example, for the day-
ahead market, a forecasting model should be retrained on
a daily basis as new information is available. Consider-
ing a testing period of a year, this means that a realistic
evaluation requires estimating the forecasting model 365
times.
5.7. Ex-ante hyperparameter optimization
A common issue in the current EPF literature is that
the hyperparameter selection is often either done ex-post
[49, 51, 126–129] or its details are not suﬃciently explained
[13, 21, 37, 48, 79, 82, 91–93, 96, 99]. As an example, when
models based on neural networks are proposed, the details
on how the number of neurons are selected are usually not
provided. In other cases, while the approach is provided,
it is often based on analyzing diﬀerent conﬁgurations of
neurons using the test dataset and selecting the one that
works best, i.e. ex-post hyperparameter selection.
Not providing enough details on how hyperparameters
are selected is an obvious problem as it prevents reproduc-
ing research. Similarly, performing hyperparameter opti-
mization ex-post leads to overﬁtting the test dataset, i.e.
the model is partially optimized using the same dataset
used for evaluating the model, and it grants the model an
unfair and non-existent advantage over other models.
To prevent this, the selection of hyperparameters should
be explicitly explained and always performed ex-ante using
a validation dataset. With that motivation, for the open-
access methods proposed, not only do we explain how the
hyperparameters are obtained, but we also provide within
the toolbox [60, 61] a module for hyperparameter selection
and the ﬁles containing the results of the hyperparameter
optimization of the current study.
5.8. Computation time
An even more common problem is the fact that new
models are very rarely compared in terms of their compu-
tational requirements [19, 20, 22, 24, 32, 37, 41, 42, 51, 90–
92, 94–97, 100]. Although a model might be marginally
better than another, it might not be worthwhile to deploy
it in a practical application if its computational require-
ments are much larger. Particularly, higher computational
requirements might pose two problems:
1. As mentioned before, forecasting models should ide-
ally be recalibrated on a daily basis. Hence, a fore-
casting method is only suitable if its computational
time allows this recalibration to take place. In this
context, the maximum available time for estimating
a model will depend on each electricity market but,
as a rule of thumb, it can be argued that any model
that requires more than 30 min or 1 h will unlikely be
suitable for forecasting prices in the spot markets.
16

2. Besides recalibration, the second issue with computa-
tion time is its cost. If the computational capabilities
are too large, the beneﬁts of using a marginally bet-
ter forecast might be lower than the cost of running
the forecasting model on a much more expensive com-
puter.
Hence, when new forecasting models are proposed, we
argue that it is very important to provide their computa-
tion times. Moreover, we also argue that for a model to be
better than the existing methods, it does not necessarily
have to be the most accurate one. Instead:
1. If its computational time is large, i.e. in the order of
minutes, the model should indeed be more accurate
than all state-of-the-art models, e.g. DNNs.
2. If its computational time is small, i.e. in the order
of seconds, the model should be more accurate than
the state-of-the-art models with low computational
requirements, e.g. LEAR.
In this article, we provide an analysis of the computa-
tional requirements of the proposed open-access models so
other researchers can easily make such comparisons.
5.9. Reproducibility
Another related issue is that some studies lack enough
details to replicate the research. Missing details vary from
study to study but the four most common are:
1. the dataset used for testing and evaluation is not de-
ﬁned [31–37];
2. the dataset used for training is not deﬁned [21, 33, 35,
41, 42];
3. the inputs of the model are unclear [35, 36, 38–40];
4. the selection of hyperparameters is unclear [13, 21, 37,
48, 79, 82, 91–93, 96, 99].
To correct this, future EPF papers should provide enough
details to allow replication and reviewers should verify that
all necessary details of the employed datasets are always
provided.
5.10. Data contamination
Another recurrent issue in the EPF literature is data
contamination, which appears when part of the training
dataset is used for testing. Particularly, when working
with time series data the test dataset should always com-
prise the last part of the dataset to avoid data contamina-
tion. If this is not done, the models can overﬁt the testing
dataset and their accuracy can be overestimated.
Despite the importance of correctly separating the train-
ing/validation dataset from the testing dataset, some stud-
ies in EPF:
1. Do not specify the split between the training, vali-
dation, and test datasets [21, 31–37, 41, 42]. If the
datasets are not speciﬁed, it is not possible to know
whether data contamination occurs.
2. Randomly sample the test dataset from the full
dataset [130–133], e.g. in a dataset comprising a year
of data randomly selecting 4 weeks for testing and the
remaining data for training.
3. Have a partial or total overlap between the train-
ing/validation dataset and the testing dataset [51,
126, 127, 134], e.g. by performing hyperparameter op-
timization ex-post.
To correct this issue, it is important that any future
research in EPF ensures that: 1) the split between the
datasets is correctly described; 2) the test dataset does
never overlap with the training or validation datasets; 3)
the test dataset is always selected as the last segment of
the full dataset.
5.11. Software toolboxes
A less pressing yet relevant issue is the use of state-of-
the-art software toolboxes. When comparing new meth-
ods with methods from the literature, the latter should
be modeled using adequate toolboxes. Particularly, it is
important to use toolboxes that are continuously updated
as implementing methods using outdated libraries leads to
unfair evaluations.
For example, in the context of neural networks, there are
several open-source state-of-the-art toolboxes [114] that
are continuously updated and that grant access to the
latest development in the ﬁeld of DL. Yet, in the con-
text of EPF, new methods are often compared with neu-
ral networks that are modeled using the MATLAB toolbox
[32, 38, 41, 42, 49, 91, 92, 94, 131], a toolbox that for
many years was outdated and did not include many of the
neural network developments that are critical in EPF, e.g.
state-of-the-art activation functions or stochastic gradient
descent algorithms [59]. As a result, many of the existing
comparisons in EPF are based on evaluations where the
accuracy of neural networks might be underestimated.
Besides using state-of-the-art software toolboxes, e.g.
the python library keras for deep learning, it is also im-
portant to employ (whenever possible) free-to-access li-
braries so that research can be replicated by anyone.
5.12. Combining forecasts
As a ﬁnal guideline, it is important to indicate the im-
portance of ensembles in the context of EPF. In general,
although exceptions exist [135], combining diﬀerent mod-
els leads to a higher accuracy [77, 121] and it is thus a good
idea to build forecasts based on multiple models. However,
as even the arithmetic average improves the accuracy of in-
dividual models, new ensemble techniques should be stud-
ied in comparison with other ensemble techniques, i.e. as
done in [121], and not simply w.r.t. the individual models.
To maximize the forecasting accuracy, it is important to
employ diverse forecasts [135], e.g. forecasts generated us-
ing diﬀerent data or diﬀerent models. For EPF, the former
can be achieved by considering models trained using dif-
ferent calibration window lengths [76, 122] and the latter
17

using diﬀerent modeling techniques or diﬀerent sets of hy-
perparameters. To further maximize the performance, the
number of models used in the ensemble should be limited
[135], e.g. 4–10, especially in the case of heavy-tailed data
for which large ensembles tend to contain outliers more
often, resulting in less accurate forecasts.
With that in mind, as part of the open-access bench-
mark and toolbox [60, 61], we also propose a series of
simple ensemble techniques. Particularly, as explained in
Section 4, we provide an ensemble of four LEAR models
that are estimated over diﬀerent calibration windows and
combined using a simple arithmetic average and another
ensemble using four DNNs that are estimated for diﬀer-
ent hyperparameters and combined using the arithmetic
average.
6. Evaluation of state-of-the-art methods
In this section, we present the results of the open-source
benchmark methods for all ﬁve datasets. For the sake of
clarity, we divide the section into two parts respectively
comprising the results for the error metrics and the results
for statistical testing.
6.1. Accuracy metrics
We ﬁrst start by presenting the results of the open-access
benchmark models in terms of accuracy metrics.
6.1.1. Individual models
Table 2 compares the performance of the two individual
models and their 4 variations in terms of rMAE, MAE,
MAPE, SMAPE, and RMSE. The LEAR model is dis-
played for 4 diﬀerent calibration windows representing 56,
84, 1092, and 1456 days, i.e. 8 weeks, 12 weeks, 3 years,
and 4 years. The four DNNs are obtained by perform-
ing the hyperparameter/feature optimization process four
times and using the best hyperparameter/feature selec-
tion of every run (see Sections 4.3.3 and 4.4 for further
details)19. Several observations can be made:
• The MAPE seems an unreliable metric as it com-
pletely disagrees with the other three linear metrics
and the quadratic metric. In particular, while the
rMAE, MAE, and sMAPE agree on what the best
model is in all the cases, the MAPE almost never does
so. This unreliability can be further seen in the Ger-
man market: while the MAPE and sMAPE metrics
usually have similar orders of magnitude, in the case
of the German market the MAPE is approximately 10
times larger. This eﬀect is due to prices in Germany
being negative and very close to 0, leading in turn to
very large MAPE values that bias the avarege MAPE.
19Note that, for the sake of simplicity, the features and hyperpa-
rameter selection for each model are not provided. However, they
can be obtained from the website [60] accompanying this study
• The DNN models seem to be more accurate than the
LEAR models. Particularly, in terms of linear met-
rics, the four DNN models perform better than all
four LEAR models for the 5 datasets.
• Although the RMSE displays slighly diﬀerent results,
this is expected as the metric is based on quadratic
errors and not linear ones. Nonetheless, while the
RMSE does display slightly diﬀerent results, it still
shows the superiority of the DNN model: even though
the DNN is estimated to minimized absolute errors
(unlike LEAR), the DNN is better in 4 of the 5
datasets. Moreover, even though the DNN seems to
be worse in two markets, the RMSE metric does not
correctly represent the underlying problem (see Sec-
tions 5.4 and 6.4.1) and it can be argued that it is
not the best metric to assess the performance of EPF
models.
6.1.2. Ensembles
The results for the ensemble methods are listed in Table
3, which compares the performance of the two ensemble
models and the best DNN and LEAR models in terms of
the rMAE metric, i.e. arguably the most reliable metric.
From the table, several observations can be made:
• As already argued in Section 5.12, combining mod-
els usually improves the accuracy. Particularly, the
ensemble of DNNs is better than the best individual
DNN model for all ﬁve markets and for all reliable
metrics. Similarly, the ensemble of LEAR models
is better than the best individual LEAR model for
all markets and reliable metrics. The exception to
this observation are the MAPE and RMSE metrics
but, as already noted, MAPE is an unreliable metric
and RMSE does not correctly represent the underly-
ing problem of EPF.
• As before, in terms of rMAE, the ensemble of DNNs
is the most accurate model across all markets, which
again seems to suggest that the DNN models are more
accurate than the LEAR models.
6.2. Statistical Testing
In this section, we present the results of the open-access
benchmark models in terms of the statistical tests. For
the sake of simplicity, we present together the results for
individual methods and ensembles. The results are based
on the multivariate GW test using the L1 norm in (12),
i.e. with the following loss diﬀerential series:
∆A,B
d = ∑24
h=1|εA
d,h|− ∑24
h=1|εB
d,h|. (15)
While squared losses could also be used, we do not con-
sider them here because absolute errors better represent
the underlying problem in EPF, see Section 6.4.1 for a
discussion.
18

Table 2: Comparison between the two individual state-of-the-art open-source methods in terms of rMAE, MAE, MAPE, sMAPE, and RMSE.
Each of the two methods is listed for four diﬀerent conﬁgurations. The gray cells represent the best model for a given metric.
DNN1 DNN2 DNN3 DNN4 LEAR56 LEAR84 LEAR1092 LEAR1456
NP
rMAE 0.471 0.415 0.437 0.438 0.475 0.472 0.482 0.481
MAE 1.946 1.717 1.808 1.812 1.964 1.952 1.993 1.990
MAPE [%] 6.04 5.46 5.93 5.85 6.34 6.36 6.10 6.14
sMAPE [%] 5.59 5.00 5.22 5.26 5.66 5.62 5.64 5.66
RMSE 3.579 3.341 3.502 3.596 3.671 3.664 3.605 3.604
PJM
rMAE 0.475 0.475 0.473 0.467 0.550 0.548 0.490 0.489
MAE 3.005 3.008 2.995 2.956 3.477 3.467 3.098 3.095
MAPE [%] 28.87 29.74 29.87 29.10 32.52 32.34 30.28 30.24
sMAPE [%] 11.99 11.93 11.89 11.81 13.68 13.58 12.33 12.54
RMSE 5.121 5.333 5.023 4.820 5.718 5.709 5.264 5.142
EPEX
rMAE 0.608 0.600 0.597 0.608 0.682 0.669 0.649 0.653
BE
MAE 6.181 6.094 6.066 6.173 6.924 6.798 6.594 6.634
MAPE [%] 24.83 28.69 24.08 30.46 32.88 32.34 26.26 22.64
sMAPE [%] 14.40 14.35 13.87 14.25 16.20 15.95 16.87 17.29
RMSE 16.577 15.879 16.304 16.488 16.371 16.291 16.458 16.420
EPEX
rMAE 0.576 0.572 0.562 0.585 0.638 0.624 0.580 0.597
FR
MAE 4.223 4.193 4.118 4.292 4.681 4.575 4.250 4.378
MAPE [%] 15.75 16.52 15.13 15.55 19.03 18.09 14.95 14.90
sMAPE [%] 12.06 12.03 11.65 11.96 13.43 13.28 13.25 14.05
RMSE 12.036 11.850 11.414 12.455 11.732 10.759 11.337 11.462
EPEX
rMAE 0.395 0.398 0.395 0.413 0.469 0.458 0.431 0.437
DE
MAE 3.601 3.633 3.605 3.771 4.283 4.18 3.93 3.988
MAPE [%] 103.14 83.1 100.59 106.38 133.38 115.61 123.39 120.24
sMAPE [%] 14.84 15.06 14.74 15.28 16.54 16.27 16.79 17.15
RMSE 6.256 6.135 6.25 6.324 7.713 7.397 6.526 6.502
In Figure 5 we display the results for the ﬁve markets.
More precisely, we use heat maps arranged as chessboards
to indicate the range of the obtained p-values. The closer
they are to zero (dark green) the more signiﬁcant is the
diﬀerence between the forecasts of a model on the X-axis
(better) and the forecasts of a model on the Y-axis (worse).
For instance, for the EPEX-DE market the ﬁrst row is
green indicating that the forecasts of LEAR 56 are signiﬁ-
cantly outperformed by those of all other models. We can
observe that:
• For all markets the last column is green indicating
that the forecasts of the ensemble of DNNs are statis-
tically signiﬁcantly better than the predictions of all
the other models for all 5 datasets.
• The forecasts of LEARens are statistically signiﬁcantly
better than those of all individual LEAR models. To-
gether with the previous observation, i.e. the superi-
ority of the DNN ensemble, this shows that the pre-
dictions of ensemble models usually improve upon the
forecasting accuracy of individual methods.
• In one dataset (EPEX-BE), the forecasts of all the
individual DNN methods are statistically signiﬁcantly
better than those of the individual LEAR models. In
three other datasets (NP, EPEX-FR, and EPEX-DE),
the forecasts of all the individual DNN methods are
statistically signiﬁcantly better than 3 out of the 4
individual LEAR models. For all datasets, there is at
least 1 DNN model whose forecasts are statistically
signiﬁcantly better than those of all LEAR models.
• The forecasts of the individual LEAR models are
never signiﬁcantly better than those of the individual
DNN models. Overall, it seems that forecasts based
on DNNs are more likely to obtain signiﬁcantly better
results; this is particularly true for the DNN ensem-
19

Table 3: Comparison between the ensembles of the state-of-the-art open-source methods in terms of rMAE, MAE, MAPE, and sMAPE. The
comparison also includes, for each market, the best individual performing DNN and LEAR model in terms of rMAE and MAE, i.e. the two
most reliable metrics. The gray cells represent the best model for a given metric.
DNN Ensemble LEAR Ensemble Best 20 DNN Best LEAR
NP
rMAE 0.403 0.420 0.415 0.472
MAE 1.667 1.738 1.717 1.952
MAPE [%] 5.38 5.53 5.46 6.36
sMAPE [%] 4.85 5.01 5.00 5.62
RMSE 3.333 3.362 3.341 3.604
PJM
rMAE 0.439 0.476 0.467 0.489
MAE 2.779 3.013 2.956 3.095
MAPE [%] 28.66 30.13 29.10 30.24
sMAPE [%] 11.22 11.98 11.81 12.54
RMSE 4.637 5.127 4.820 5.142
EPEX
rMAE 0.573 0.604 0.597 0.649
BE
MAE 5.821 6.140 6.066 6.594
MAPE [%] 26.11 20.72 24.08 26.26
sMAPE [%] 13.33 14.55 13.87 16.87
RMSE 16.127 15.974 15.879 16.371
EPEX
rMAE 0.533 0.543 0.562 0.58
FR
MAE 3.910 3.980 4.118 4.250
MAPE [%] 14.77 14.68 15.13 14.95
sMAPE [%] 10.98 11.57 11.65 13.25
RMSE 11.738 10.676 11.414 10.759
EPEX
rMAE 0.377 0.395 0.395 0.431
DE
MAE 3.441 3.609 3.601 3.93
MAPE [%] 95.76 113.98 83.1 115.61
sMAPE [%] 14.19 14.74 14.74 16.27
RMSE 5.997 6.508 6.135 6.502
ble.
6.3. Computation time
As described in Section 5.8, besides comparing the pre-
dictive accuracy, it is also necessary to analyze the com-
putation time of the forecasting methods. Table 4 lists
a comparison of the computation time required for esti-
mating the models considered, i.e. the time required to
recalibrate each model on a daily basis. As the computa-
tion time is non-deterministic, its value is given as a range.
These data were obtained using a regular laptop quadcore
CPU, i.e. the i7-6920HQ.
As can be observed, although the LEAR model performs
slightly worse than the DNN model, its computation time
is 30 to 100 times lower; particularly, when considering the
maximum computation time of both methods, the LEAR
model is 50 times faster.
Table 4: Computation time that each benchmark model requires to
perform a daily recalibration.
Time
LEAR 1–10 seconds
LEAR Ensemble 20–25 seconds
DNN 2–5 minutes
DNN Ensemble 8–20 minutes
6.4. Discussion and remarks
In this section, we provide some ﬁnal remarks behind the
motivation of the metrics employed, we brieﬂy analyze the
inﬂuence of the diﬀerent metrics considered, and provide
a discussion on comparing new models.
6.4.1. Absolute vs. squared errors
Throughout the text, we have mostly considered accu-
racy metrics based on absolute/linear errors, i.e. metrics
20

LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
NP
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
PJM
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
EPEX-BE
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
EPEX-FR
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
LEARens
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
DNNens
EPEX-DE
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Figure 5: Results of the GW test with the multivariate loss diﬀerential series (15) for the eight individual models and the two ensembles. A
heat map is used to indicate the range of the obtained p-values for each of the ﬁve markets. The closer the p-values are to zero (dark green),
the more signiﬁcant the diﬀerence is between the forecasts of a model on the X-axis (better) and the forecasts of a model on the Y-axis
(worse). Black color indicates p-values above the color map limit, i.e. p-values larger or equal than 0.10.
that evaluate the accuracy of predicting the median of
the distribution. Since the LEAR model is estimated by
minimizing squared errors, thus leading to forecasts of the
mean [117], one could argue that a metric/test based on
squared errors should be preferred. While the argument
has some merits, we focused on absolute metrics for three
reasons:
• The metric used to evaluate the accuracy should be
the one that better represents the underlying prob-
lem. In the case of EPF, since the cost of purchasing
electricity is linear, linear metrics are arguably the
best to quantify the risk associated with forecasting
errors.
• While we provided the RMSE results, they are quali-
tatively the same as for MAE/rMAE. Hence, as abso-
lute errors better represent the underlying problem of
EPF and the results are similar, the RMSE results are
not analyzed here in detail due to space limitations.
• While the LEAR model is indeed estimated using
squared errors, this is partly done because the tech-
niques to eﬃciently estimate the LASSO, e.g. coordi-
nate descent, are based on square errors. This gives
the LEAR model a computational advantage over the
DNN. An alternative would be to use regularized
quantile regression [136] leading, however, to an in-
creased computational burden with little beneﬁts on
the accuracy in terms of MAE/rMAE.
6.4.2. Metrics
The obtained results validate the general guideline pro-
posed in Section 5.4 regarding accuracy metrics: research
in EPF should avoid MAPE and only use metrics like
sMAPE or RMSE in conjunction with any version of
rMAE. Particularly, the results validate the following three
claims:
• MAE is as reliable as rMAE. However, as the errors
are not relative, comparison between datasets is not
possible and rMAE is preferred.
• sMAPE is more reliable than MAPE and it agrees
with MAE/rMAE. Yet, it has the problem of an un-
deﬁned mean and an inﬁnite variance. Thus, it is less
reliable than rMAE.
• MAPE is not a reliable metric as it gives more im-
portance to datapoints close to zero. As such, using
MAPE can lead to misleading results and wrong con-
clusions.
• RMSE is more reliable than MAPE but it does
not represent correctly the underlying risks of EPF.
Hence, it should not be used alone to evaluate fore-
casting models.
21

6.4.3. Performance of open-access models
Based on the extensive comparison of Sections 6.1–6.3, it
can be concluded that the models based on DL are more
likely to outperform those based on statistical methods.
This is especially true in the context of DL ensemble mod-
els as the ensemble of DNNs obtains results that are sta-
tistically signiﬁcantly better than any other model.
However, while DNNs outperformed the LEAR mod-
els, the latter are still the state-of-the-art in terms of low
complexity and computational cost. In particular, their
performance is very close to that of DNNs, but with the
advantage of having computational costs that are up to
100 times lower. As such, they are the best available op-
tion when decision making has to be done within seconds.
In short, new models for EPF should either be compared
against LEAR models or DNNs depending on the decision
time that is available. For a method to be considered more
accurate than state-of-the-art methods, it should either
be more accurate than the DNN model, or more accurate
than LEAR but with similar or lower computational re-
quirements.
7. Checklist to ensure adequate EPF research
As a ﬁnal contribution, and with the goal of facilitating
the work of reviewers of future EPF publications, we pro-
vide a short checklist to evaluate whether any new research
in EPF satisﬁes the requirements to be reproducible and
to lead to meaningful conclusions:
• The test dataset comprises at least a year of data.
• Any new model is tested against state-of-the-art open-
access models, e.g. the ones provided here.
• The computational cost of new methods is evaluated
and compared against the computational cost of ex-
isting methods.
• The employed datasets are open-access.
• The study is based on multiple markets.
• rMAE is employed as one of the accuracy metrics to
evaluate forecasting accuracy.
• Statistical testing is used to assess whether diﬀerences
in performance are signiﬁcant.
• Forecasting models are recalibrated on a daily basis
and not simply estimated once and evaluated in the
full out-of-sample dataset.
• Hyperparameters are estimated using a validation
dataset that is diﬀerent from the test dataset.
• The split and dates of the dataset are explicitly stated.
• All the inputs of the model are explicitly deﬁned.
• The test dataset is selected as the last section of the
full dataset and does not contain any overlapping data
with the training or validation datasets.
• State-of-the-art and free toolboxes are used for mod-
eling the benchmark models.
While this is just a very short summary of the guidelines
described in Section 5, we think it is very useful to have
them summarized together for quick evaluations of new
research.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we have derived a set of best practices for
performing research in electricity price forecasting (EPF).
Particularly, as the ﬁeld of EPF lacks a rigorous approach
to compare and to evaluate new forecasting models, we
have analyzed diﬀerent factors aﬀecting the quality of the
research, e.g. dataset size or accuracy metrics, and we have
proposed solutions to ensure that new research is adequate,
reproducible, and useful.
In addition, as comparisons in EPF are often done us-
ing datasets that no other researches has ever tested,
we have proposed an extensive open-access benchmark
dataset comprising 6 years of recent data in 5 diﬀerent
markets. The aim of the benchmark dataset is to pro-
vide a common framework for future research so that new
methods can be validated under the same conditions and
meaningful comparisons can be obtained. To facilite fu-
ture research, we have developed an open-source python
library named epftoolbox [60, 61] that provides easy ac-
cess to these datasets.
Similarly, as new methods in EPF are often not com-
pared with well-established methods, we have proposed
several state-of-the-art open-source models based on sta-
tistical methods and deep learning. The methods are
tuned automatically and require no expert knowledge in
order to be used. These methods are provided as open-
source within the proposed epftoolbox library [60, 61] so
that other researches can employ them as benchmarks in
their own studies. Although the proposed methods are
currently developed in python, we would like to extend
the support to other languages; in that spirit, we encour-
age other researchers to help us do so.
Finally, to have a complete open-access benchmark, we
have evaluated the two proposed open-access methods in
the open-access dataset and we have provided the results
in terms of accuracy metrics and statistical testing. Using
these results, we have shown that deep neural networks
are more likely to outperform LEAR methods but that
the latter are the best model for applications with short
decision timeframes. Moreover, we have also shown that
ensemble methods often obtain signiﬁcantly better results
than their individual counterparts. Based on the same re-
sults, we have also showed the importance of the guidelines
as to what constitutes good practices. The most notable
22

guidelines were that MAPE is an unreliable metric that
should be avoided, that statistical testing is mandatory to
obtain meaningful conclusions, and that the length of the
test dataset should be at least one year.
Acknowledgment
This research has received funding from the Euro-
pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gram under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie grant agree-
ment No. 675318 (INCITE), the Ministry of Science
and Higher Education (MNiSW, Poland) through grant
No. 0219/DIA/2019/48 and the National Science Center
(NCN, Poland) through grant No. 2018/30/A/HS4/00444.
References
[1] C. Brancucci Martinez-Anido, G. Brinkman, B.-M. Hodge,
The impact of wind power on electricity prices, Renewable En-
ergy 94 (2016) 474–487. doi:10.1016/j.renene.2016.03.053.
[2] A. Gianfreda, L. Parisio, M. Pelagatti, The impact of RES in
the Italian day-ahead and balancing markets, Energy Journal
37 (2016) 161–184. doi:10.5547/01956574.37.si2.agia.
[3] L. Grossi, F. Nan, Robust forecasting of electricity prices: Sim-
ulations, models and the impact of renewable sources, Tech-
nological Forecasting and Social Change 141 (2019) 305–318.
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2019.01.006.
[4] K. Maciejowska, Assessing the impact of renewable energy
sources on the electricity price level and variability – a quan-
tile regression approach, Energy Economics 85 (2020) 104532.
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2019.104532.
[5] R. Weron, Electricity price forecasting: A review of the state-
of-the-art with a look into the future, International Jour-
nal of Forecasting 30 (4) (2014) 1030–1081. doi:10.1016/j.
ijforecast.2014.08.008.
[6] J. Nowotarski, R. Weron, Recent advances in electricity price
forecasting: A review of probabilistic forecasting, Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 81 (1) (2018) 1548–1568.doi:
10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.234.
[7] F. Ziel, R. Steinert, Probabilistic mid- and long-term electric-
ity price forecasting, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views 94 (2018) 251–266. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2018.05.038.
[8] T. Hong, P. Pinson, Y. Wang, R. Weron, D. Yang,
H. Zareipour, Energy forecasting: A review and outlook,
IEEE Open Access Journal of Power and Energy (2020)
submitted. Working paper version available from RePEc:
https://ideas.repec.org/p/ahh/wpaper/worms2008.html.
[9] B. Uniejewski, R. Weron, F. Ziel, Variance stabilizing trans-
formations for electricity spot price forecasting, IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems 33 (2) (2018) 2219–2229. doi:
10.1109/tpwrs.2017.2734563.
[10] G. Marcjasz, B. Uniejewski, R. Weron, On the importance
of the long-term seasonal component in day-ahead electricity
price forecasting with NARX neural networks, International
Journal of Forecasting 35 (4) (2019) 1520–1532. doi:10.1016/
j.ijforecast.2017.11.009.
[11] A. Cruz, A. Mu˜ noz, J. Zamora, R. Esp´ ınola, The eﬀect of
wind generation and weekday on Spanish electricity spot price
forecasting, Electric Power Systems Research 81 (10) (2011)
1924–1935. doi:10.1016/j.epsr.2011.06.002.
[12] L. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Chen, Short-term electricity price fore-
casting with stacked denoising autoencoders, IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems 32 (4) (2016) 2673–2681. doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2628873.
[13] U. Ugurlu, I. Oksuz, O. Tas, Electricity price forecasting using
recurrent neural networks, Energies 11 (5) (2018) 1255. doi:
10.3390/en11051255.
[14] W. Zhang, F. Cheema, D. Srinivasan, Forecasting of electricity
prices using deep learning networks, in: Proceedings of the
2018 IEEE PES Asia-Paciﬁc Power and Energy Engineering
Conference, 2018, pp. 451–456. doi:10.1109/APPEEC.2018.
8566313.
[15] S. Luo, Y. Weng, A two-stage supervised learning approach
for electricity price forecasting by leveraging diﬀerent data
sources, Applied Energy 242 (2019) 1497 – 1512. doi:10.1016/
j.apenergy.2019.03.129.
[16] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Ma, Q. Jin, Brim: An accurate electric-
ity spot price prediction scheme-based bidirectional recurrent
neural network and integrated market, Energies 12 (12) (2019)
2241. doi:10.3390/en12122241.
[17] Z. Chang, Y. Zhang, W. Chen, Electricity price prediction
based on hybrid model of Adam optimized LSTM neural
network and wavelet transform, Energy 187 (2019) 115804.
doi:10.1016/j.energy.2019.07.134.
[18] W. Gao, A. Darvishan, M. Toghani, M. Mohammadi, O. Abe-
dinia, N. Ghadimi, Diﬀerent states of multi-block based fore-
cast engine for price and load prediction, International Jour-
nal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 104 (2019) 423–435.
doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2018.07.014.
[19] M. S. Nazar, A. E. Fard, A. Heidari, M. Shaﬁe-khah, J. P.
Catal˜ ao, Hybrid model using three-stage algorithm for simul-
taneous load and price forecasting, Electric Power Systems Re-
search 165 (2018) 214–228. doi:10.1016/j.epsr.2018.09.004.
[20] L. Zhou, B. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Wang, M. Yang, Seasonal
classiﬁcation and RBF adaptive weight based parallel com-
bined method for day-ahead electricity price forecasting, in:
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Power & Energy Society In-
novative Smart Grid Technologies Conference, 2018, pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/isgt.2018.8403372.
[21] N. Singh, S. Hussain, S. Tiwari, A PSO-based ANN model
for short-term electricity price forecasting, in: Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing, 2018, pp. 553–563. doi:
10.1007/978-981-10-7386-1_47 .
[22] Z. Yang, L. Ce, L. Lian, Electricity price forecasting by a hy-
brid model, combining wavelet transform, ARMA and kernel-
based extreme learning machine methods, Applied Energy 190
(2017) 291–305. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.12.130.
[23] R. A. Chinnathambi, S. J. Plathottam, T. Hossen, A. S. Nair,
P. Ranganathan, Deep neural networks (DNN) for day-ahead
electricity price markets, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
Electrical Power and Energy Conference, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
doi:10.1109/epec.2018.8598327.
[24] J. Olamaee, M. Mohammadi, A. Noruzi, S. M. H. Hosseini,
Day-ahead price forecasting based on hybrid prediction model,
Complexity 21 (S2) (2016) 156–164. doi:10.1002/cplx.21792.
[25] A. Darudi, M. H. Javidi, M. Bashari, Electricity price fore-
casting using a new data fusion algorithm, IET Generation,
Transmission & Distribution 9 (12) (2015) 1382–1390. doi:
10.1049/iet-gtd.2014.0653.
[26] M. Ghayekhloo, R. Azimi, M. Ghofrani, M. Menhaj,
E. Shekari, A combination approach based on a novel data clus-
tering method and Bayesian recurrent neural network for day-
ahead price forecasting of electricity markets, Electric Power
Systems Research 168 (2019) 184–199. doi:10.1016/j.epsr.
2018.11.021.
[27] A. A. Victoire, B. Gobu, S. Jaikumar, N. Arulmozhi, P. Kan-
imozhi, A. Victoire, Two-stage machine learning framework
for simultaneous forecasting of price-load in the smart grid,
in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Machine Learning and Applications, 2018, pp. 1081–1086.
doi:10.1109/icmla.2018.00176.
[28] M. Zahid, F. Ahmed, N. Javaid, R. Abbasi, H. Zainab Kazmi,
A. Javaid, M. Bilal, M. Akbar, M. Ilahi, Electricity price and
load forecasting using enhanced convolutional neural network
and enhanced support vector regression in smart grids, Elec-
tronics 8 (2) (2019) 122. doi:10.3390/electronics8020122.
[29] L. Jiang, G. Hu, Day-ahead price forecasting for electricity
market using long-short term memory recurrent neural net-
23

work, in: Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on
Control, Automation, Robotics and Vision, 2018, pp. 949–954.
doi:10.1109/icarcv.2018.8581235.
[30] S. Zhou, L. Zhou, M. Mao, H. Tai, Y. Wan, An optimized het-
erogeneous structure LSTM network for electricity price fore-
casting, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 108161–108173. doi:10.1109/
ACCESS.2019.2932999.
[31] A. Aggarwal, M. M. Tripathi, A novel hybrid approach using
wavelet transform, time series time delay neural network, and
error predicting algorithm for day-ahead electricity price fore-
casting, in: Proceedings of the 201 International Conference on
Computer Applications In Electrical Engineering-Recent Ad-
vances, 2017, pp. 199–204. doi:10.1109/cera.2017.8343326.
[32] Y.-Y. Hong, C.-Y. Liu, S.-J. Chen, W.-C. Huang, T.-H. Yu,
Short-term LMP forecasting using an artiﬁcial neural net-
work incorporating empirical mode decomposition, Interna-
tional Transactions on Electrical Energy Systems 25 (9) (2014)
1952–1964. doi:10.1002/etep.1949.
[33] S. Talari, M. Shaﬁe-khah, G. Os´ orio, F. Wang, A. Heidari,
J. Catal˜ ao, Price forecasting of electricity markets in the pres-
ence of a high penetration of wind power generators, Sustain-
ability 9 (11) (2017) 2065. doi:10.3390/su9112065.
[34] N. Singh, S. R. Mohanty, R. D. Shukla, Short term electricity
price forecast based on environmentally adapted generalized
neuron, Energy 125 (2017) 127–139. doi:10.1016/j.energy.
2017.02.094.
[35] G. M. Khan, R. Arshad, N. M. Khan, Eﬃcient prediction of
dynamic tariﬀ in smart grid using CGP evolved artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks, in: Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications, 2017, pp.
493–498. doi:10.1109/icmla.2017.0-113.
[36] M. Afrasiabi, M. Mohammadi, M. Rastegar, A. Kargarian,
Multi-agent microgrid energy management based on deep
learning forecaster, Energy 186 (2019) 115873. doi:10.1016/
j.energy.2019.115873.
[37] Y. Zhu, R. Dai, G. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Lu, Power market price
forecasting via deep learning, in: Proceedings of the 44th An-
nual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society,
2018. doi:10.1109/iecon.2018.8591581.
[38] D. Wang, H. Luo, O. Grunder, Y. Lin, H. Guo, Multi-step
ahead electricity price forecasting using a hybrid model based
on two-layer decomposition technique and BP neural network
optimized by ﬁreﬂy algorithm, Applied Energy 190 (2017) 390–
407. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.12.134.
[39] N. A. Shrivastava, B. K. Panigrahi, M.-H. Lim, Electricity
price classiﬁcation using extreme learning machines, Neural
Computing and Applications 27 (1) (2014) 9–18.doi:10.1007/
s00521-013-1537-1 .
[40] P. Jiang, X. Ma, F. Liu, A new hybrid model based on data pre-
processing and an intelligent optimization algorithm for elec-
trical power system forecasting, Mathematical Problems in En-
gineering 2015 (2015) 1–17. doi:10.1155/2015/815253.
[41] P. Bento, J. Pombo, M. Calado, S. Mariano, A bat optimized
neural network and wavelet transform approach for short-term
price forecasting, Applied Energy 210 (2018) 88–97. doi:10.
1016/j.apenergy.2017.10.058.
[42] M. G. Khajeh, A. Maleki, M. A. Rosen, M. H. Ahmadi,
Electricity price forecasting using neural networks with an
improved iterative training algorithm, International Journal
of Ambient Energy 39 (2) (2017) 147–158. doi:10.1080/
01430750.2016.1269674.
[43] J. Lago, F. De Ridder, P. Vrancx, B. De Schutter, Forecast-
ing day-ahead electricity prices in Europe: The importance
of considering market integration, Applied Energy 211 (2018)
890–903. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.11.098.
[44] P.-H. Kuo, C.-J. Huang, An electricity price forecasting model
by hybrid structured deep neural networks, Sustainability
10 (4) (2018) 1280. doi:10.3390/su10041280.
[45] S. Mujeeb, N. Javaid, M. Ilahi, Z. Wadud, F. Ishmanov,
M. Afzal, Deep long short-term memory: A new price and load
forecasting scheme for big data in smart cities, Sustainability
11 (4) (2019) 987. doi:10.3390/su11040987.
[46] S. Atef, A. B. Eltawil, A comparative study using deep learning
and support vector regression for electricity price forecasting
in smart grids, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Applications, 2019,
pp. 603–607. doi:10.1109/IEA.2019.8715213.
[47] S. Mujeeb, N. Javaid, ESAENARX and DE-RELM: Novel
schemes for big data predictive analytics of electricity load
and price, Sustainable Cities and Society 51 (2019) 101642.
doi:10.1016/j.scs.2019.101642.
[48] S. Lahmiri, Comparing variational and empirical mode decom-
position in forecasting day-ahead energy prices, IEEE Systems
Journal 11 (3) (2017) 1907–1910. doi:10.1109/jsyst.2015.
2487339.
[49] S. E. Peter, I. J. Raglend, Sequential wavelet-ANN with em-
bedded ANN-PSO hybrid electricity price forecasting model
for Indian energy exchange, Neural Computing and Appli-
cations 28 (8) (2016) 2277–2292. doi:10.1007/s00521-015-
2141-3.
[50] A. Naz, M. Javed, N. Javaid, T. Saba, M. Alhussein, K. Au-
rangzeb, Short-term electric load and price forecasting us-
ing enhanced extreme learning machine optimization in smart
grids, Energies 12 (5) (2019) 866. doi:10.3390/en12050866.
[51] Anamika, R. Peesapati, N. Kumar, Electricity price fore-
casting and classiﬁcation through wavelet–dynamic weighted
PSO–FFNN approach, IEEE Systems Journal 12 (4) (2018)
3075–3084. doi:10.1109/jsyst.2017.2717446.
[52] W. Gao, V. Sarlak, M. R. Parsaei, M. Ferdosi, Combination of
fuzzy based on a meta-heuristic algorithm to predict electricity
price in an electricity markets, Chemical Engineering Research
and Design 131 (2018) 333–345. doi:10.1016/j.cherd.2017.
09.021.
[53] T. Hong, P. Pinson, S. Fan, H. Zareipour, A. Troccoli, R. J.
Hyndman, Probabilistic energy forecasting: Global energy
forecasting competition 2014 and beyond, International Jour-
nal of Forecasting 32 (3) (2016) 896–913. doi:10.1016/j.
ijforecast.2016.02.001.
[54] Nord pool website.
URL www.nordpoolspot.com
[55] B. Uniejewski, J. Nowotarski, R. Weron, Automated variable
selection and shrinkage for day-ahead electricity price forecast-
ing, Energies 9 (8) (2016) 621. doi:10.3390/en9080621.
[56] R. Tibshirani, Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodologi-
cal) (1996) 267–288doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.tb02080.
x.
[57] F. Ziel, R. Weron, Day-ahead electricity price forecasting
with high-dimensional structures: Univariate vs. multivariate
modeling frameworks, Energy Economics 70 (2018) 396–420.
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2017.12.016.
[58] B. Uniejewski, R. Weron, Eﬃcient forecasting of electricity
spot prices with expert and lasso models, Energies 11 (8)
(2018) 2039. doi:10.3390/en11082039.
[59] J. Lago, F. De Ridder, B. De Schutter, Forecasting spot elec-
tricity prices: deep learning approaches and empirical com-
parison of traditional algorithms, Applied Energy 221 (2018)
386–405. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.02.069.
[60] Epftoolbox library.
URL https://github.com/jeslago/epftoolbox
[61] Epftoolbox documentation.
URL https://epftoolbox.readthedocs.io
[62] K. Mayer, S. Tr¨ uck, Electricity markets around the world,
Journal of Commodity Markets 9 (2018) 77–100.doi:10.1016/
j.jcomm.2018.02.001.
[63] R. A¨ ıd, Electricity Derivatives, Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/
978-3-319-08395-7 .
[64] K. Maciejowska, R. Weron, Electricity price forecasting, in:
Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online, Wiley, 2019, pp.
1–9. doi:10.1002/9781118445112.stat08215.
[65] R. Weron, F. Ziel, Electricity price forecasting, in: U. Soy-
tas, R. Sari (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Energy Economics,
24

Routledge, 2018, pp. 506–521. doi:10.4324/9781315459653-
36.
[66] A. Gianfreda, F. Ravazzolo, L. Rossini, Comparing the fore-
casting performances of linear models for electricity prices with
high RES penetration, International Journal of Forecasting 36
(2020) 974–986. doi:10.1016/j.ijforecast.2019.11.002.
[67] H. Zou, T. Hastie, Regularization and variable selection via
the elastic net, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
B (Statistical Methodology) 67 (2) (2005) 301–320. doi:10.
1111/j.1467-9868.2005.00503.x.
[68] F. Ziel, R. Steinert, S. Husmann, Forecasting day ahead elec-
tricity spot prices: The impact of the EXAA to other Euro-
pean electricity markets, Energy Economics 51 (2015) 430–444.
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2015.08.005.
[69] F. Ziel, Forecasting electricity spot prices using lasso: On
capturing the autoregressive intraday structure, IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems 31 (6) (2016) 4977–4987. doi:
10.1109/tpwrs.2016.2521545.
[70] S. Schneider, Power spot price models with negative prices,
Journal of Energy Markets 4 (4) (2011) 77–102.doi:10.21314/
jem.2011.079.
[71] G. Diaz, E. Planas, A note on the normalization of Spanish
electricity spot prices, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
31 (3) (2016) 2499–2500. doi:10.1109/tpwrs.2015.2449757.
[72] J. Nowotarski, J. Tomczyk, R. Weron, Robust estimation and
forecasting of the long-term seasonal component of electricity
spot prices, Energy Economics 39 (2013) 13–27. doi:10.1016/
j.eneco.2013.04.004.
[73] J. Nowotarski, R. Weron, On the importance of the long-term
seasonal component in day-ahead electricity price forecasting,
Energy Economics 57 (2016) 228–235. doi:10.1016/j.eneco.
2016.05.009.
[74] F. Lisi, M. Pelagatti, Component estimation for electricity
market data: Deterministic or stochastic?, Energy Economics
74 (2018) 13–37. doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2018.05.027.
[75] G. Marcjasz, B. Uniejewski, R. Weron, On the importance
of the long-term seasonal component in day-ahead electricity
price forecasting with NARX neural networks, International
Journal of Forecasting 35 (4) (2019) 1520–1532. doi:10.1016/
j.ijforecast.2017.11.009.
[76] K. Hubicka, G. Marcjasz, R. Weron, A note on averaging day-
ahead electricity price forecasts across calibration windows,
IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 10 (1) (2019) 321–
323. doi:10.1109/tste.2018.2869557.
[77] G. Marcjasz, T. Seraﬁn, R. Weron, Selection of calibration
windows for day-ahead electricity price forecasting, Energies
11 (9) (2018) 2364. doi:10.3390/en11092364.
[78] S. Mujeeb, N. Javaid, M. Akbar, R. Khalid, O. Nazeer,
M. Khan, Big data analytics for price and load forecast-
ing in smart grids, in: Lecture Notes on Data Engineering
and Communications Technologies, Springer, 2018, pp. 77–87.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-02613-4_7 .
[79] X. Xie, W. Xu, H. Tan, The day-ahead electricity price fore-
casting based on stacked CNN and LSTM, in: Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing, 2018,
pp. 216–230. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-02698-1_19 .
[80] U. Ugurlu, O. Tas, A. Kaya, I. Oksuz, The ﬁnancial eﬀect
of the electricity price forecasts’ inaccuracy on a hydro-based
generation company, Energies 11 (8) (2018) 2093. doi:10.
3390/en11082093.
[81] J. K. Kolberg, K. Waage, Artiﬁcial intelligence and Nord
Pool’s intraday electricity market Elbas: a demonstration and
pragmatic evaluation of employing deep learning for price
prediction: using extensive market data and spatio-temporal
weather forecasts, Master’s thesis, Norwegian School of Eco-
nomics (2018).
[82] J. Xu, R. Baldick, Day-ahead price forecasting in ERCOT mar-
ket using neural network approaches, in: Proceedings of the
Tenth ACM International Conference on Future Energy Sys-
tems, 2019, pp. 486–491. doi:10.1145/3307772.3331024.
[83] J.-H. Meier, S. Schneider, I. Schmidt, P. Sch¨ uller,
T. Sch¨ onfeldt, B. Wanke, ANN-based electricity price fore-
casting under special consideration of time series properties,
in: Information and Communication Technologies in Educa-
tion, Research, and Industrial Applications, Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2019, pp. 262–275. doi:10.1007/978-3-
030-13929-2_13.
[84] Z. Chang, Y. Zhang, W. Chen, Eﬀective adam-optimized
LSTM neural network for electricity price forecasting, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Soft-
ware Engineering and Service Science, 2018, pp. 245–248.
doi:10.1109/icsess.2018.8663710.
[85] H. Jahangir, H. Tayarani, S. Baghali, A. Ahmadian, A. Elka-
mel, M. Aliakbar Golkar, M. Castilla, A novel electricity price
forecasting approach based on dimension reduction strategy
and rough artiﬁcial neural networks, IEEE Transactions on In-
dustrial Informatics (4) (2019) 2369–2381. doi:10.1109/TII.
2019.2933009.
[86] W. Ahmad, N. Javaid, A. Chand, S. Y. R. Shah, U. Yasin,
M. Khan, A. Syeda, Electricity price forecasting in smart
grid: A novel E-CNN model, in: Web, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Network Applications, Springer International Publishing,
2019, pp. 1132–1144. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-15035-8_109 .
[87] D. Aineto, J. Iranzo-S´ anchez, L. G. Lemus-Z´ u˜ niga, E. Onain-
dia, J. F. Urchuegu´ ıa, On the inﬂuence of renewable energy
sources in electricity price forecasting in the Iberian market,
Energies 12 (11) (2019) 2082. doi:10.3390/en12112082.
[88] S. Schn¨ urch, A. Wagner, Machine learning on EPEX order
books: Insights and forecasts (2019). arXiv:1906.06248.
[89] J. Zhang, Z. Tan, C. Li, A novel hybrid forecasting method
using GRNN combined with wavelet transform and a GARCH
model, Energy Sources, Part B: Economics, Planning, and
Policy 10 (4) (2015) 418–426. doi:10.1080/15567249.2011.
557685.
[90] J.-L. Zhang, Y.-J. Zhang, D.-Z. Li, Z.-F. Tan, J.-F. Ji, Fore-
casting day-ahead electricity prices using a new integrated
model, International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy
Systems 105 (2019) 541–548. doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2018.
08.025.
[91] H. Varshney, A. Sharma, R. Kumar, A hybrid approach
to price forecasting incorporating exogenous variables for a
day ahead electricity market, in: Proceedings of the 2016
IEEE International Conference on Power Electronics, Intel-
ligent Control and Energy Systems, 2016, pp. 1–6. doi:
10.1109/icpeices.2016.7853355.
[92] L. Xiao, W. Shao, M. Yu, J. Ma, C. Jin, Research and ap-
plication of a hybrid wavelet neural network model with the
improved cuckoo search algorithm for electrical power sys-
tem forecasting, Applied Energy 198 (2017) 203–222. doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.04.039.
[93] R. Bisoi, P. K. Dash, P. P. Das, Short-term electricity price
forecasting and classiﬁcation in smart grids using optimized
multikernel extreme learning machine, Neural Computing and
Applications 32 (2018) 1457–1480. doi:10.1007/s00521-018-
3652-5.
[94] M. K. Kim, Short-term price forecasting of nordic power mar-
ket by combination Levenberg–Marquardt and cuckoo search
algorithms, IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution
9 (13) (2015) 1553–1563. doi:10.1049/iet-gtd.2014.0957.
[95] A. Pourdaryaei, H. Mokhlis, H. A. Illias, S. H. A. Kaboli,
S. Ahmad, Short-term electricity price forecasting via hybrid
backtracking search algorithm and ANFIS approach, IEEE
Access 7 (2019) 77674–77691. doi:10.1109/access.2019.
2922420.
[96] H. Ebrahimian, S. Barmayoon, M. Mohammadi, N. Ghadimi,
The price prediction for the energy market based on a new
method, Economic Research-Ekonomska Istraˇ zivanja 31 (1)
(2018) 313–337. doi:10.1080/1331677x.2018.1429291.
[97] O. Abedinia, N. Amjady, M. Shaﬁe-khah, J. Catal˜ ao, Electric-
ity price forecast using combinatorial neural network trained
by a new stochastic search method, Energy Conversion and
Management 105 (2015) 642–654. doi:10.1016/j.enconman.
25

2015.08.025.
[98] S. Itaba, H. Mori, An electricity price forecasting model with
fuzzy clustering preconditioned ANN, Electrical Engineering
in Japan 204 (3) (2018) 10–20. doi:10.1002/eej.23094.
[99] M. Ghofrani, R. Azimi, F. M. Najafabadi, N. Myers, A new
day-ahead hourly electricity price forecasting framework, in:
Proceedings of the 2017 North American Power Symposium,
2017, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/naps.2017.8107269.
[100] S. Itaba, H. Mori, A fuzzy-preconditioned GRBFN model for
electricity price forecasting, Procedia Computer Science 114
(2017) 441–448. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2017.09.010.
[101] ENTSO-E transparency platform.
URL https://transparency.entsoe.eu/
[102] Pjm website.
URL www.pjm.com
[103] Elia, Grid data.
URL http://www.elia.be/en/grid-data/dashboard
[104] RTE, Grid data.
URL https://data.rte-france.com/
[105] Amprion website.
URL https://www.amprion.net/
[106] 50hertz website.
URL https://www.50hertz.com/
[107] Tennet website.
URL https://www.tennet.eu/
[108] J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, B. K´ egl, Algorithms for
hyper-parameter optimization, in: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2011, pp. 2546–2554.
[109] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman, The Elements of Sta-
tistical Learning, Springer Series in Statistics, Springer New
York Inc., New York, NY, USA, 2001. doi:10.1007/978-0-
387-21606-5.
[110] F. Ziel, R. Steinert, S. Husmann, Eﬃcient modeling and fore-
casting of electricity spot prices, Energy Economics 47 (2015)
98 – 111. doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2014.10.012.
[111] B. Efron, T. Hastie, I. Johnstone, R. Tibshirani, Least angle
regression, Annals of Statistics 32 (2) (2004) 407–499. doi:
10.1214/009053604000000067.
[112] Y. Yao, L. Rosasco, A. Caponnetto, On early stopping in
gradient descent learning, Constructive Approximation 26 (2)
(2007) 289–315. doi:10.1007/s00365-006-0663-2 .
[113] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss,
V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau,
M. Brucher, M. Perrot, E. Duchesnay, Scikit-learn: Machine
learning in Python, Journal of Machine Learning Research 12
(2011) 2825–2830.
[114] F. Chollet, Keras (2015).
URL https://github.com/fchollet/keras
[115] R. J. Hyndman, Errors on percentage errors (2014).
URL https://robjhyndman.com/hyndsight/smape/
[116] R. J. Hyndman, A. B. Koehler, Another look at measures of
forecast accuracy, International Journal of Forecasting 22 (4)
(2006) 679–688. doi:10.1016/j.ijforecast.2006.03.001.
[117] R. J. Hyndman, G. Athanasopoulos, Forecasting: principles
and practice, OTexts, 2018.
[118] F. X. Diebold, R. S. Mariano, Comparing predictive accuracy,
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13 (3) (1995) 253–
263. doi:10.1080/07350015.1995.10524599.
[119] F. X. Diebold, Comparing predictive accuracy, twenty years
later: A personal perspective on the use and abuse of Diebold-
Mariano tests, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics
33 (1) (2015) 1–9. doi:10.1080/07350015.2014.983236.
[120] S. Bordignon, D. W. Bunn, F. Lisi, F. Nan, Combining day-
ahead forecasts for British electricity prices, Energy Economics
35 (2013) 88–103. doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2011.12.001.
[121] J. Nowotarski, E. Raviv, S. Tr¨ uck, R. Weron, An empirical
comparison of alternative schemes for combining electricity
spot price forecasts, Energy Economics 46 (2014) 395–412.
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2014.07.014.
[122] T. Seraﬁn, B. Uniejewski, R. Weron, Averaging predictive
distributions across calibration windows for day-ahead elec-
tricity price forecasting, Energies 12 (13) (2019) 2561. doi:
10.3390/en12132561.
[123] G. Marcjasz, J. Lago, R. Weron, B. D. Schutter, Neural net-
works in day-ahead electricity price forecasting: single vs. mul-
tiple outputs, Energy Conversion and Management (Submit-
ted).
[124] R. Giacomini, H. White, Tests of conditional predictive ability,
Econometrica 74 (6) (2006) 1545–1578. doi:10.1111/j.1468-
0262.2006.00718.x.
[125] R. Giacomini, B. Rossi, Forecasting in macroeconomics, in:
Handbook of Research Methods and Applications in Empirical
Macroeconomics, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2013, pp. 381–408.
doi:10.4337/9780857931023.00024.
[126] N. N. A. N. Ibrahim, I. A. W. A. Razak, S. S. M. Sidin, Z. H.
Bohari, Electricity price forecasting using neural network with
parameter selection, in: Intelligent and Interactive Comput-
ing, Springer Singapore, 2019, pp. 141–148. doi:10.1007/978-
981-13-6031-2_33 .
[127] I. P. Panapakidis, A. S. Dagoumas, Day-ahead electricity
price forecasting via the application of artiﬁcial neural net-
work based models, Applied Energy 172 (2016) 132–151. doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.03.089.
[128] N. K. Singh, A. K. Singh, M. Tripathy, Short-term load/price
forecasting in deregulated electric environment using ELMAN
neural network, in: Proceedings of the 2015 International Con-
ference on Energy Economics and Environment, 2015, pp. 1–6.
doi:10.1109/energyeconomics.2015.7235086.
[129] S. S. Reddy, C.-M. Jung, K. J. Seog, Day-ahead electricity
price forecasting using back propagation neural networks and
weighted least square technique, Frontiers in Energy 10 (1)
(2016) 105–113. doi:10.1007/s11708-016-0393-y .
[130] J. Nascimento, T. Pinto, Z. Vale, Day-ahead electricity market
price forecasting using artiﬁcial neural network with spearman
data correlation, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE PowerTech
Conference, 2019, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/ptc.2019.8810618.
[131] D. Kotur, M. Zarkovic, Neural network models for electric-
ity prices and loads short and long-term prediction, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 International Symposium on Environ-
mental Friendly Energies and Applications, 2016, pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/efea.2016.7748787.
[132] C. Monteiro, I. Ramirez-Rosado, L. Fernandez-Jimenez,
P. Conde, Short-term price forecasting models based on ar-
tiﬁcial neural networks for intraday sessions in the Iberian
electricity market, Energies 9 (9) (2016) 721. doi:10.3390/
en9090721.
[133] C. Monteiro, L. Fernandez-Jimenez, I. Ramirez-Rosado, Ex-
planatory information analysis for day-ahead price forecasting
in the Iberian electricity market, Energies 8 (9) (2015) 10464–
10486. doi:10.3390/en80910464.
[134] Anamika, N. Kumar, Market-clearing price forecasting for In-
dian electricity markets, in: Proceeding of International Con-
ference on Intelligent Communication, Control and Devices,
Springer Singapore, 2016, pp. 633–642. doi:10.1007/978-
981-10-1708-7_72 .
[135] A. F. Atiya, Why does forecast combination work so well?,
International Journal of Forecasting 36 (1) (2020) 197–200.
doi:10.1016/j.ijforecast.2019.03.010.
[136] Y. Li, J. Zhu, L1-norm quantile regression, Journal of Com-
putational and Graphical Statistics 17 (2008) 163—-185. doi:
10.1198/106186008x289155.
26