Ukraine’s Energy  
Security and the  
Coming Winter 
An energy action plan for Ukraine 
and its partners

The IEA examines the 
full spectrum 
of energy issues 
including oil, gas and 
coal supply and 
demand, renewable 
energy technologies, 
electricity markets, 
energy efficiency, 
access to energy, 
demand side 
management and 
much more. Through 
its work, the IEA 
advocates policies that 
will enhance the 
reliability, affordability 
and sustainability of 
energy in its  
31 member countries, 
13 association 
countries and beyond.
This publication and any 
map included herein are 
without prejudice to the 
status of or sovereignty over 
any territory, to the 
delimitation of international 
frontiers and boundaries and 
to the name of any territory, 
city or area.
Source: IEA. 
International Energy Agency 
Website: www.iea.org
IEA member 
countries:    
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Republic of Türkiye
United Kingdom
United States
The European 
Commission also 
participates in the 
work of the IEA
IEA association 
countries:
Argentina 
Brazil
China
Egypt
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Morocco
Senegal
Singapore 
South Africa 
Thailand 
Ukraine
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY
AGENCY

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Abstract 
 
PAGE | 3  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Abstract  
This special report from the IEA,  Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming 
Winter, provides an energy action plan for Ukraine and its partners to help the 
country meet its energy needs through the challenging months ahead. 
Ukraine's energy system has been targeted since Russia launched its full-scale 
invasion of the country in February 2022. These attacks on key infrastructure have 
recently increased and intensified, posing a huge threat to reliable access to 
power, heating and communications services across Ukraine this winter. 
This special report lays out 10 key energy actions to reinforce the country’s energy 
security – essential to its security overall – at this critical juncture. It will take stock 
of the war’s impact on Ukraine’s energy sector, identify key risks for the coming 
winter and outline immediate actions that Ukraine and its partners could take in 
response. While the main focus is on Ukraine, the report also examines the energy 
situation in Moldova. 
 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Acknowledgements 
PAGE | 4  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Acknowledgements, contributors 
and credits  
This report was prepared by a team drawn from different parts of the International 
Energy Agency (IEA). It was designed and directed by Tim Gould, Chief Energy 
Economist. T he lead authors were  Craig Hart, Dennis Hesseling, Akos Losz, 
Gergely Molnar, Talya Vatman and Jacques Warichet. 
Valuable comments and feedback were provided by IEA senior management and 
other colleagues within the IEA , in particular by Mary Warlick , Ali Al-Saffar, 
Theresa Gebhardt , Ronan Graham, Pablo Hevia Koch, Milosz Karpinski, 
Christophe McGlade, Emma Mooney, Ksenia Petrichenko, Jairo Plata, Frederick 
Ritter, and Peter Zeniewski. 
Thanks go to the IEA’s Communications and Digital Office for their help in 
producing the report and website materials. Particular thanks go to Julia Horowitz, 
who edited the report, and to Jethro Mullen, Rob Stone, Astrid Dumond, Clara 
Vallois and Poeli Bojorquez. 
Many senior government officials and international experts provided input and 
reviewed a preliminary draft of the report. Their comments and suggestions were 
of great value. They include:  colleagues from the Ministry of Energy of Ukraine  
and from Ukrenergo, and from the Ministry of Energy of the Republic of Moldova; 
Jonathan Elkind (Center on Global Energy Policy, Columbia University) ; 
Frederikke Laursen and Pernille Hagedorn-Rasmussen (Danish Energy Agency); 
Inna Surzhok, Valentyna Diatlovska, Oleksii Orzh el and Jasmina Trhulj (Energy 
Community); Arvid Tuerkner and Giuseppe Grimaldi (European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development) ; Jolanta Navickaite, Julia Walschebauer and 
Mechthild Woersdoerfer (DG-ENER, European Commission) ; Bruno Governeur 
(ENTSO-E); Kacper Zeromski (ENTSO-G); Susanne Nies (Green Deal Ukraina); 
Borys Dodonov (Kyiv School of Economics); Krzysztof Bolesta (Ministry of Climate 
and Environment, Poland) ; Dovilė Paužaitė  and Vita Naujokaityt ė (Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Lithuania) ; Viven Lo and Isabel Murray  (Natural Resources 
Canada); Jan Petter Nore (NORAD, Nord University); Rafi Nersessian and Russ 
Conklin (United States Department of Energy); Scott Greenip, Juhani M Platt, Erik 
J Magdanz  and Geoff Pyatt (U nited States Department of State) ; Christopher 
Metz, Stephen Lowe, Charlotte Beck, Marina Delegan, Ryan King and Tetiana 
Temniuk (Government of the United Kingdom) ; and Antonio Albino Marques  
(REN).  

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Acknowledgements 
PAGE | 5  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
The individuals and organisations that contributed to this report are not 
responsible for any opinions or judgements it contains. All errors and omissions 
are solely the responsibility of the IEA. 
Note on data: because of the ongoing conflict, a significant portion of Ukraine’s 
energy data has been restricted and is not accessible to the public.  All data and 
other information in this report is based on publicly available sources. 
 
  

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Executive summary 
PAGE | 6  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Executive summary 
This year has seen a step change in the intensity of attacks on Ukraine’s 
energy sector, creating risks that extend far beyond energy as Ukraine 
approaches the winter months. While Russia has regularly targeted energy 
infrastructure in Ukraine since its full -scale invasion of the country in February 
2022, its  most recent bombardments have been unprecedented in scale;  a 
concerted attack in late August 2024, for example, involved more than 200 
missiles and drones. Air defence measures have been unable to prevent major 
damage. The primary targets have been in the electricity sector –  including 
generation, transmission and distribution – but district heating networks and some 
gas infrastructure have also been hit. 
Rolling blackouts and other unscheduled interruptions to supply have 
become the norm, limiting electricity provision in the worst-affected regions 
to a few hours per day.  While Ukrainians have showed immense solidarity, 
courage and ingenuity –  and support from Ukraine’s international partners has 
been crucial in keeping systems functioning – the power system is increasingly 
fragile. During the summer of 2024, Ukraine experienced a major power deficit as 
generation capacity fell more than 2  gigawatts ( GW) below peak demand of 
12 GW. Unreliable electricity is having knock-on effects on all aspects of daily life. 
Strains that are bearable in the summer months may become unbearable when 
temperatures start to fall and suppl ies of heat and water  falter, triggering further 
displacement of affected populations across the country and abroad. 
Ukraine’s energy system made it through two successive winters since 
Russia’s invasion, but the third promises to be the sternest of tests. Over the 
course of 2022 and 2023, about half of Ukraine’s power generation capacity was 
either occupied by Russian forces, destroyed or damaged – and approximately 
half of large network substations were damaged by missiles and drones. Strains 
on Ukraine’s energy sector through the first two winters of war were mitigated by 
significant reductions in demand, relatively mi ld weather and a major collective 
effort to repair damaged facilities and mobilise alternative sources of supply. 
However, intensified attacks between March and May 2024 left Ukraine with only 
around a third of its pre- war electricity generation capacity by mid -year, even 
before the latest strikes. The stresses on the system are now immense. Ukraine 
is increasingly dependent on the three remaining operational nuclear power plants 
and the over-crowded links between these plants and the main cities closer to the 
front lines in the east. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Executive summary 
PAGE | 7  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Ukraine’s international partners have been providing much- needed 
equipment and aid throughout the war, but today’s acute situation demands 
further support.  After years of dependence on Russia for  its energy  supply, 
Ukraine is now looking west not only for short -term fixes, but also for integration, 
infrastructure links and , ultimately, a better kind of energy future. This report 
proposes tangible and immediate actions that Ukraine and its partners can take to 
address its pressing energy security vulnerabilities and to bolster Ukraine’s longer-
term resilience. The central focus is naturally on Ukraine, but a coordinated 
regional approach is essential to address implications for Moldova. Four issues 
stand out: 
• Ukraine’s severe electricity deficit . Peak demand could increase to 
18.5 GW this winter. Even with the return of nuclear units from maintenance 
over the summer , and the continued import of 1.7 GW of electricity from 
Ukraine’s European neighbours, the supply deficit could reach as much as 
6 GW, equivalent to peak annual demand in  Denmark. Further attacks on 
infrastructure, unforeseen equipment failures and missed maintenance 
cycles add further risks. 
• Heat supply to Ukraine’s major cities . Most attacks on heating 
infrastructure have occurred in regions close to the front lines. The Kharkiv 
region is now without large- scale heat generating capacity and other 
frontline regions – particularly Chernihiv, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia, Sumy and 
Mykolaiv – have suffered severe damage to their heat generation capacities. 
Heat supply is also at risk in Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv. 
• Potential strains on Ukraine’s natural gas balance. Under average 
weather conditions, Ukraine could meet all its  gas demand requirements 
from domestic production and storage, but a colder -than-average winter 
would increase the need for imports. Once Russian transit volumes halt in 
January, after current contracts  expire, additional supply would require  
physical west-to-east gas flows piped to Ukraine from Central and Eastern 
Europe. 
• Disruption to gas and electricity supply arrangements in Moldova. 
Moldova no longer relies directly on Russian gas to meet demand on the 
territory that it controls, but indirect dependence is still strong because it 
receives around two-thirds of its electricity from a large power plant based 
in the breakaway, Russian- backed region of Transnistria. The upcoming 
expiry of the transit arrangements for Russian gas through Ukraine , at the 
end of 2024, creates significant uncertainty for gas deliveries to the region 
of Transnistria and for Moldova’s electricity security. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Executive summary 
PAGE | 8  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
10 key energy sector actions 
 
These 10 actions are designed, first and foremost, to safeguard an essential 
level of energy services in Ukraine through the coming months. This 
necessarily involves actions outside the energy sector, with effective air defence 
being by far the most important, alongside the provision of essential energy 
equipment, imported supply , and back -up capabilities. Quick responses are 
crucial, and Ukraine’s international partners will need to be creative and nimble to 
minimise delays and do what it takes to help. At the same time, it will be important 
to build in  structural changes , wherever possible, that will increase Ukraine’s 
resilience over the medium term and put the country’s energy sector on a  
sustainable pathway towards modernisation and integration with the  rest of 
Europe. Many of these actions are already underway or under consideration, but 
time is of the essence.  
1. Bolster the physical and cyber security of Ukraine’s critical energy 
infrastructure. Repair and construction work needs to be done with a view 
towards protecting assets against further attacks, especially at crucial nodes 
in the system like the network substations near nuclear power plants . This 
includes not only fortification, concealment and defence measures against 
modern military technologies , but also protection against attempted 
cyberattacks, which have tripled since the invasion. 
2. Expedite the delivery of equipment and spare parts for repairs . The 
donation, sale or lease of essential equipment – such as transformers, 
generators and spare parts  – has been an essential component of 
international support to Ukraine. This is now more important than ever and 
needs to be facilitated by streamlined import procedures  and a clear 
prioritisation of needs. 
3. Increase and decentralise power supply. Large energy assets are more 
vulnerable to attack , so decentralisation brings clear security benefits.  
Ukraine has seen a massive influx of diesel generators to provide back -up 
power. Accelerating deployment of s maller-scale gas-fired combined heat 
and power plants , and solar PV and wind systems complemented by 
batteries and other storage technologies is crucial to increase the resilience 
of supply . A particular focus is needed on  supply for hospitals, schools, 
water pumps and mobile networks. 
4. Expand electricity transmission capacity with the European Union . 
Ukraine and its partners swiftly moved to synchronise Ukraine (and 
Moldova) with the main European electricity system after the 2022 invasion, 
but the current limits on transmission capacity are set by relatively 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Executive summary 
PAGE | 9  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
conservative guidance on network risk management. An expansion of west-
to-east electricity flows in support of Ukraine is possible but requires political 
support.  
5. Engage consumers in energy saving and demand response, while 
continuing investments in energy efficiency. A social tariff that 
safeguards a certain volume of consumption at subsidised rates, after which 
consumers pay a higher price, would help to incentivise efficient practices 
and investments, supported by public information campaigns that advise on 
energy efficiency measures for immediate impact as well as longer -term 
gains. Lowering the default temperature for district heating can also provide 
quick savings. 
6. Prepare back-up options for winter heating. Expedited delivery of smaller 
combined heat and power units should focus on bolstering supply in the 
worst-affected regions in the east. Investment in reliable back -up options 
should also include liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG) heaters, wood and coal 
stoves, and associated reserves of fuel, especially for rural areas. 
7. Build up natural gas storage levels . Ukraine’s storage sites play a key 
role in meeting winter gas demand. Ukraine and its international partners 
need to ensure that inventory levels are adequate ahead of the winter to 
ensure that the gas system can react to unexpected demand or supply 
shocks. 
8. Strengthen firm gas import capacities from the European Union. Some 
of the current arrangements that guarantee the availability of capacity for 
gas flows to Ukraine are expiring. They need to be extended and reinforced, 
as necessary, to provide Ukraine with assured options for import. Operating 
the trans-Balkan pipeline system in reverse mode, with a more competitive 
tariff structure, would enhance gas supply security for Ukraine and Moldova. 
9. Coordinate approaches to Ukraine and Moldova. While not subject to the 
same physical risks from attacks, the coming winter could also be 
destabilising in Moldova, including Transnistria, as gas and electricity flows 
and relationships move to a new footing. Energy security issues in Ukraine 
and Moldova are closely linked, and investments in new sources of supply, 
energy efficiency and reinforced interconnections with neighbouring 
countries bring both national and regional gains. This requires coordinated 
strategies that recognise the inter-related nature of risks across the region 
and act quickly to mitigate them. 
10. Lay the groundwork for a modern, market -based, resilient and 
sustainable Ukrainian energy system , well integrated with the EU 
system. The immediate priority is to mitigate the extreme risks over the 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Executive summary 
PAGE | 10  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
coming winter, but it will be vital to start actions that have a longer lead time 
– including investment in reinforced transmission corridors with western 
neighbours – and to integrate, wherever possible, a medium-term vision for 
a new Ukrainian energy system into the immediate response. 
 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 11  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Ukraine’s energy system under 
attack 
Introduction 
On the morning of 26 August 2024, Russia fired more than 200 missiles and 
drones in one of its largest aerial attacks on Ukraine; the main targets were 
the country’s energy infrastructure. Around 8 million households lost power  
without warning; the capital, Kyiv, experienced its first unscheduled blackout since 
November 2022. Ukraine’s air defences provided some protection, but the scale 
of the attack and the resulting disruption highlighted once again the vital strategic 
importance of Ukraine’s energy sector, as well as the ever -present risks to the 
country’s energy supply.  
Ukraine’s energy system1 has been regularly targeted by Russia since its 
full-scale invasion in 2022, with attacks intensifying since the spring of 2024. 
The targeting of energy infrastructure has had wide-ranging consequences for the 
provision of energy  to Ukrainian households and other consumers. Over the 
course of 2022-23, about half of Ukraine’s power generation capacity was either 
occupied by Russian forces, destroyed or damaged, and approximately half of the 
large network substations were damaged by missiles and drones. The occupation 
of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, on its own, reduced available Ukrainian 
power generation capacity by 6 gigawatts ( GW). In the wave of attacks between 
March and May 2024, Ukraine lost another 9 GW of generation capacity; this was 
mainly thermal and hydro assets, although some smaller solar PV units also came 
under attack, as well as numerous substations. This left Ukraine with only around 
one-third of its pre-war capacity, even before the most recent round of summer 
attacks. Ukraine's district heating and natural gas infrastructure has also been 
targeted. Since 2022, 18 large combined heat and power (CHP) plants have been 
damaged or completely destroyed, along with more than 800 boiler houses. Some 
above-ground natural gas storage infrastructure has been damaged , although 
underground inventories remain unaffected. 
Ukraine experienced an acute power deficit over the summer months of 
2024, when its generation capacity fell 2.3 GW below its peak demand of 
12 GW, despite electricity imports from Ukraine’s western neighbours. The 
deficit has been  managed by  Ukraine’s state -owned electricity transmission 
system operator, Ukrenergo, through rolling cuts to supply, limiting electricity 
 
 
1 See Annex for background information on Ukraine’s energy sector 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 12  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
provision in the worst -affected regions to a few hours per day. While Ukrainians 
have show n immense solidarity, ingenuity and resilience, and support from 
Ukraine’s partners, including equipment and spare parts, have been instrumental 
in maintaining a functioning system, the possibility of an even deeper shortfall in 
energy supply during the upcoming cold winter months presents profound risks.  
This report describes the urgent challenges facing Ukraine’s energy sector 
and outlines tangible actions that can be taken by Ukraine and its partners 
to address its immediate energy security vulnerabilities ahead of the winter, 
while bolstering long-term resilience. The central focus is on Ukraine, but the 
report also incorporates analysis of the situation in Moldova, whose energy system 
is closely interlinked with that of Ukraine.  The remainder of this section  of the 
report provides background on the status of electricity, heat and gas supply in 
Ukraine, the second section examines the risks facing the energy sector during 
the upcoming winter. The final section identifies 10 key energy actions to address 
these risks. 
Electricity 
Since 2022, Russian targeting of Ukraine's power infrastructure has sought 
to destabilise the electricity system by disabl ing large coal and gas -fired 
generation units and key parts of the transmission network. Prior to Russia’s 
full-scale invasion in 2022, nuclear power generated half of the country’s 
electricity, followed by coal-fired plants at 23% and gas -fired plants at 9%. As of 
the end of May 2024 2, about 70% of Ukraine's thermal generation capacity was 
either occupied or damaged, and the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (whose 
6 GW of capacity generated around one- quarter of Ukraine’s electricity supply 
prior to 2022) remained under Russian control. Additionally, approximately half of 
Ukrenergo’s very high voltage substations had been damaged, as well as many 
distribution substations, leading to intermittent unavailability of parts of the 
electricity network despite ongoing repairs. Recent attacks underscored the risks 
to supply from Ukraine’s other nuclear plants, as damage to nearby substations 
can prevent these plants feeding the grid or endanger the backup supply that 
keeps the reactors safe. The electric power industry is the part of the energy sector 
that has suffered the greatest damage since the Russian  invasion in 2022, 
estimated in June to top USD 11.4 billion, with three -quarters of the losses  in 
generation facilities and the remainder in networks. Full like-for-like restoration of 
all the lost generation capacities is not aligned with Ukraine's vision for the future, 
but early estimates for the cost of building back are around USD 30 billion.  
 
 
2 The extent of the additional damage caused by more recent  attacks, notably the large attack on 26 August, was still 
uncertain at the time of writing. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 13  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Estimated electricity generation capacity available to Ukraine at selected times since 
2022 
 
Sources: UNDP (2023), Update on the Energy Damage assessment June 2023, Towards a green transition of the energy 
sector in Ukraine, https://www.undp.org/ukraine/publications/towards-green-transition-energy-sector-ukraine 
Ukrainian Government (2024), Герман Галущенко: Ми відновили і додали до енергосистеми 3 ГВт потужності 
https://www.kmu.gov.ua/news/herman-halushchenko-my-vidnovyly-i-dodaly-do-enerhosystemy-3-hvt-potuzhnosti 
Ukrainian Government (2024), За два роки росія атакувала українську енергетику понад 1000 разів – Герман 
Галущенко, https://mev.gov.ua/novyna/za-dva-roky-rosiya-atakuvala-ukrayinsku-enerhetyku-ponad-1000-raziv-herman-
halushchenko 
 
Industrial power consumption has halved since the 2022 invasion, and even 
though household electricity use is down 20%, it now constitutes the largest share 
of overall demand. The composition and level of Ukrainian electricity consumption 
has shifted significantly. Industrial demand has plummeted. The 20% fall in 
residential demand is largely due to the effect of 6.5 million Ukrainian refugees 
leaving the country, although some policies and initiatives have helped save 
electricity. For example, an EU-funded program that replaced incandescent bulbs 
with LED bulbs reduced demand by as much as  1 GW. Many utilities are now 
facing extreme financial difficulties due to lost assets, lower revenues due to 
reduced economic activity and additional expenses such as clearing debris or the 
cost of repairing or demolishing damaged facilities.  While donors have been 
providing much -needed equipment  and assistance to restore damaged 
infrastructure, including standalone generators for critical infrastructure such as 
hospitals, water systems and district heating companies, the scale of the challenge 
remains huge.  
Despite the high investment risks, the construction of a more decentralised 
system has begun, increasing resilience to attack and laying the 
groundwork for a distinctive longer-term transition pathway. In contrast with 
other countries, where decentralisation has been driven by sustainability 
concerns, the clear driver in Ukraine is energy security.  Large-scale generating 
units are easier targets for missiles and drone attacks, so the Ukrainian 
government gave guidance early on to deploy decentralised generation, mainly 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
 2022, before full-scale
invasion
 March 2023  March 2024 Summer 2024
aavailable generation capacity (in GW)

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 14  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
small modular gas turbines in the range of 5 to 40 megawatts (MW), and to speed 
up the deployment of rooftop solar with storage in administrative buildings, 
hospitals, schools, households and businesses. Almost 1 500 MW of consumer-
installed solar PV w as in place by the beginning of 2024 , with deployment 
continuing at a regular pace in recent years.3  
Net monthly trade of electricity of the Ukrainian power system 
 
 
Interconnection with the main European  system4 has made a crucial 
contribution to Ukraine’s electricity security, with the limit on cross-border 
trade5 increasing to 1.7 GW in November 2023.  Before the 2022 invasion, 
Ukraine's power system was inter connected with the Russian and Belarussian 
grids. P lans had been in place since 2017 to synchroni se with the continental 
Europe system in 2023. On the day of the invasion, Ukraine had just disconnected 
from the Russian and Belarusian system , performing a planned test of  “isolated 
mode” operation. Soon after the invasion, Ukraine (along with Moldova) requested 
an emergency synchronisation, which was achieved in record time: an initial 
timeline of months was brought down to a matter of weeks thanks to an  
extraordinary effort from the involved European transmission system operators 
(TSOs) and Ukrenergo, coordinated by the European Network of Transmission 
System Operators for Electricity ( ENTSO-E), with the strong support of the 
European Commission. Since then, integration with the European system has 
been a priority. Trade started in June 2022 with trade limits gradually increasing. 
Currently, the trade limit from continental Europe to Ukraine and Moldova stands 
at 1.7 GW, complemented with a non- firm emergency inter-TSO agreement that 
can provide a few hundred megawatts of  support for a few hours if network 
 
 
3 A law adopted in July 2024 exempts energy equipment imports from duties and taxes and introduced favourable loans for 
energy investments. By another government decision, businesses generating at least 80% of their electricity consumption, 
or importing at least 80% of their electricity consumption from the rest of Europe, are exempted from rolling blackouts. 
4 Continental Europe is the largest synchronously interconnected system in Europe, spanning from Portugal to Ukraine and 
West Denmark to Italy. It will be further expanded in 2025 to include the Baltic states. 
5 See Annex for information on how cross-border capacity limits are defined. 
-1 000
- 800
- 600
- 400
- 200
 0
 200
 400
 600
Moldova Russian Federation Belarus EU Net trade
GWh
Imports Exports
Synchronisation 
to continental
Europe system

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 15  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
conditions permit. In June 2024, Ukraine’s total imports were close to 2 GW for a 
few hours every day , and joint efforts with neighbouring system operators are 
continuing to increase the trade limit further. 
Map of the western portion of the Ukrainian grid and its existing and planned 
interconnectors with Moldova and the continental Europe system 
 
Note: The corridors for proposed/under construction transmission lines from have been estimated based on substation 
locations. 
Sources: ENTSO-E Transmission System Map, Green Deal Ukraina (2024). 
 


Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 16  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Even so, t he summer electricity deficit has resulted in daily power cuts, 
disrupting lives and businesses and heightening social and humanitarian 
risks. During the months of June and July, even with power imports, the estimated 
supply-demand gap ranged from 0. 8 GW to 2 .3 GW – the latter equivalent to 
Slovenia's peak demand. This has led to rolling blackouts across the country. Most 
citizens have faced these daily power cuts with solidarity, but the limited availability 
of electricity-dependent facilities such as elevators and water has made daily life 
difficult. The end of the scheduled maintenance to nuclear power plants eased the 
situation in August, but this was before the recent intensification of attacks. Many 
households and businesses have purchased small-scale diesel generators and 
power banks as back-up options to maintain supply during the blackouts.  
Heating 
Ukraine’s extensive district heating network, which provides most of the hot 
water and space heating in large cities , has been repeatedly targeted by 
Russian forces since the 2022 invasion. In 2022, more than one -third of 
Ukrainian households were connected to the district heating network , according 
to the State Statistics Service. Most of the heat production (about 70%) is fuelled 
by natural gas, and about a third of Ukraine’s heat supply is generated by 
combined heat and power (CHP) plants, while the remainder comes from 
conventional heat plants and other sources . Between February 2022 and May 
2024, a total of 18 large-scale CHP plants were damaged or destroyed, as well as 
815 boiler houses, 152 central heating points, and 354 kilometres of district 
heating pipes, according to the Kyiv School of Economics. The direct damage  
resulting from these attacks (excluding social and economic costs) is estimated at 
USD 2.4 billion, with more than half attributable to attacks on CHP plants
6. 
As with the attacks on electricity infrastructure, damage to heat supply is 
highly disruptive to the population. Ukraine was spared catastrophic losses to 
its heat supply during the 2022-23 and 2023-24 winters, when attacks were more 
limited and the winters relatively mild. With the escalation of attacks against 
Ukraine’s energy infrastructure in 2024, the risk s are significantly higher this 
winter. Temperatures can routinely drop below - 10 °C between December and 
March, posing a serious humanitarian risk if heating is not available.  
Heavily subsidised residential heat tariffs have led to significant fiscal 
strains and a build -up of debt.  Large subsidies to district heat producers  had 
previously been reduced thanks to price reforms between 2014 and 2016 (which 
led to a five -fold increase in residential tariffs ). By 2021, the public service 
obligation (PSO) requiring Naftogaz , Ukraine’s national oil and natural gas 
 
 
6 These aggregates exclude damages incurred in Ukrainian territories occupied by Russia. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 17  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
company, to supply discounted gas to district heating companies was phased out. 
It was re-introduced shortly after the 2022 invasion, fixing gas prices for residential 
heat producers at less than half the market rate , and has been extended until at 
least 30 April 2025. The current PSO scheme has contributed to significant 
financial challenges and large arrears to Naftogaz. The company was forced to 
restructure its foreign currency-denominated debt in 2023, and by October 2023, 
it estimated its accumulated debt from district heating companies stood at UAH 95 
billion (USD 2.6 billion) . No provision for Naftogaz’s losses was included in 
Ukraine’s 2024 budget.  
Natural gas 
Russia’s 2022 invasion was followed by a one- third decline in Ukraine’s 
natural gas demand: consumption in 2022 fell below 20 billion cubic metres 
(bcm), the lowest level since independence in 1991. This was largely driven by 
the decline in demand from district heating companies, industry and households. 
Ukraine’s natural gas demand increased by 2.5% (or 0.5 bcm) in 2023, with growth 
primarily driven by a partial recovery in industrial and commercial activity. First 
indications are that gas demand in 2024 is similar to 2023, with natural gas use in 
power generation limited to peak hours. The PSO scheme that was re-introduced 
in 2022 extends to nearly all segments of the market , regulating prices at levels 
below market rates . This offers protection to consumers but , as noted above, 
comes at significant cost and disincentivises efficiency improvements, as well as 
new investments. 
Ukraine’s natural gas production has been more resilient than its demand, 
but it still fell by 6% in 2022  to 18.5 bcm  – its lowest level since 1999.  
Production rose slightly in 2023 and t here are some tentative signs of higher 
output in 2024: P roduction numbers for the first seven months of 2024 for 
Naftogaz, Ukraine’s largest producer, rose by 7% year -on-year, supported by a 
concerted effort to develop new wells and increase productivity rates at old wells. 
The company is targeting 15 bcm of na tural gas production in 2024, up from 
14 bcm in 2023.  
The steep decline in natural gas demand has brought Ukraine close to self-
sufficiency in gas, and the need for imports has decreased significantly. A 
similar pattern of reduced import demand is visible in Ukraine’s coal sector 7. 
According to Naftogaz, Ukraine did not import natural gas during the 2023- 24 
heating season, with all demand met through domestic production and storage 
 
 
7 In 2023, Ukraine produced 16.4 million tonnes (Mt) of coal and imported less than 1  Mt, a big drop from imports of 4.6 Mt 
in 2022 and from almost 20 Mt in 2021. Almost two- thirds was used in the electricity sector, almost one- third was used in 
steel mills and around 10% for building heating. Efforts are being made to enhance domestic production: DTEK Energy, the 
largest coal producer in Ukraine, announced that it began operating 26 longwalls in 2023, and 11 more in 2024 (as of August). 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 18  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
withdrawals. Naftogaz expects that Ukraine will not need gas imports through the 
2024-25 winter. Ukraine has the capacity to import around 60 million cubic metres 
(mcm) of gas per day from the European Union and Moldova; however, not all of 
this capacity can be considered firm 8 on a long- term basis (i.e. longer than a 
quarter), which can pose risks in a security of supply crisis.  
Russian gas transit volumes via Ukraine continued to decline in 2023. 
Russian transit flows dropped by 65% from more than 40 bcm in 2021 to less than 
15 bcm in 2023. This is less than half of the capacities booked by Gazprom under 
its long-term contract. The main countries that still receive Russian gas via Ukraine 
are Austria and Slovakia, although Czechia and Hungary also receive limited 
volumes. Gas also transits Ukraine to the Transnistria region of Moldova. 
Natural gas production and demand in Ukraine and Russian transit flows 
 
 
The transit and interconnector agreement s between Ukraine and Gazprom 
expire at the end of 2024. Ukraine’s gas TSO has explicitly stated that it will not 
renew the interconnector agreement, although it would not hinder other  parties’ 
direct discussions. It is not excluded that some sort of continued arrangement for 
transit flows might yet be found, but the base case assumption is that Russian 
transit flows via Ukraine will be discontinued from January 2025. 
Russia has been targeting some natural gas infrastructure in Ukraine, 
including production sites and transmission and distribution networks, as 
well as gas storage facilities. While gas storage in deep underground facilities 
is unaffected, above-ground facilities are more easily targeted and have sustained 
 
 
8 Firm capacity refers to natural gas transmission capacity contractually guaranteed as uninterruptible by  the transmission 
system operator. 
0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 110
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
bcm
Domestic production Demand Transit

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 19  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
some damage. Production sites  in the east of the country  have been most 
vulnerable, although the sharp decline in output seen in the first months of the 
invasion was reversed as Ukraine regained territory in the Kharkiv region in late 
2022. Parts of Ukraine’s transmission and distribution system were also damaged, 
again primarily in the eastern part of the country.  
Several gas storage facilities in the east  have faced operational limitations 
or been damaged by Russia’s invasion, but the bulk of gas storage is in 
western Ukraine. The Krasnopopivske (0.42 bcm) and Verhunske (0.4 bcm) 
underground storage sites are located under territory occupied by Russia, and 
there have been reports of damage to surface facilities at other sites. Gas storage 
facilities were also damaged in Russia’s major missile and drone attack in late 
August, although the storage operator remains able to fulfil nominations to 
customers. Ukraine can offer the bulk of its large storage sites (30 bcm, mainly in 
Western Ukraine) for use by European companies, but security risks mean that 
European traders have so far made limited use of  this option9. Lower storage 
utilisation weighs on the revenue and profitability of Ukraine’s system operator.    
Gas metering facilities on the border between Russia and Ukraine have been 
in the spotlight. In May 2022, the Gas TSO of Ukraine declared force majeure at 
the Sokhranivka gas metering station, claiming illegal actions and unauthorised 
gas offtakes by Russian forces. According to the Gas TSO of Ukraine, flows could 
have been temporarily rerouted through the Sudzha gas entry point, although 
Gazprom declined to accommodate this option. This led to a significant decline in 
transit volumes. More recently, as part of a Ukrainian cross -border offensive into 
Russia’s Kursk region in August 2024, Ukrainian forces reportedly took control of 
the Sudzha gas metering station – the only remaining entry point for Russian gas 
into Ukraine. For the moment, this has not resulted in any further decline in gas 
transit flows, which have remained steady at around 40 mcm per day. 
 
Implications for Moldova 
Moldova has strong energy infrastructure links with Ukraine, and its energy 
security has also been strongly affected by the war and the attacks on 
Ukraine’s energy assets. In recent years, Moldova has pushed to diversify away 
from its historical dependence on Russian gas; the gas consumed within the 
 
 
9 Injections into Ukrainian storage sites in June and July 2024 by European companies were ten times lower than in the same 
period of 2023 (declining from 0.69 bcm in June-July 2023 to less than 0.1 bcm in June-July 2024). 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Ukraine’s energy system under attack 
PAGE | 20  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
territory controlled by the Moldovan government (i.e. excluding the breakaway, 
Russian-backed region of Transnistria) is now imported through Romania.  
However, Moldova retains a strong indirect reliance on Russia because it 
receives around two-thirds of its electricity from a large power plant  based 
in the Transnistrian region. This plant – Moldavskaya GRES, or MGRES – has 
an installed capacity of 2 520 MW and is fuelled by gas imported from Russia via 
Ukraine. The region of Transnistria currently receives 2.1 bcm per year of Russian 
gas, essentially free of charge, through a contract between Gazprom and national 
operator Moldovagaz and sells the electricity on to Moldova. These electricity sales 
are a mainstay of Moldova’s energy security and represent an important source of 
revenue for Transnistria. While MGRES can also use coal to generate electricity, 
the plant’s coal reserves have dwindled since 2022, and the plant is configured to 
use a type of coal imported from the Russian-occupied Donbass region of Ukraine. 
The expiry of the transit arrangements for Russian gas through Ukraine 
creates significant uncertainty for gas deliveries to the region of Transnistria 
and for Moldova’s electricity security . Moldova is preparing for different 
scenarios but faces tangible risks to the security and affordability of its energy 
supply.  
Moldova has been working to diversify its electricity supplies and modernise 
energy infrastructure: attracting further investment is a major priority . 
Moldova has increased its installed renewable capacity after adopting legislation 
to promote deployment in 2018, but more needs to be done to bring forward new 
projects for generation, grid infrastructure and energy efficiency. As of 2023, wind 
and solar made up roughly 10% of total electricity generation.  
Strengthening interconnections with neighbouring European markets is 
essential to bolster Moldova’s energy security, with benefits for the wider 
region. A third 400 kilovolt (kV) high-voltage power line between Moldova and 
Romania (Straseni -Gutinas) has been  approved and is scheduled to be 
operational by 2031, alongside the planned  Vulcanesti-Chisinau and Balti -
Suceava lines that should come online in late 2025 and 2027, respectively . The 
400 kV line currently under construction between Isaccea (Romania) and Ukraine 
would increase the import capacity of Ukraine and Moldova by at least 1 GW10. In 
the short -term, Moldova's winter preparedness plan also includes diesel 
generators and building stocks of biofuels and firewood, in addition to securing 
additional imports of electricity from Romania and the wider Europe. 
 
 
 
10 Originally planned for 2028, an accelerated commissioning by 2026 is possible if the line were included in the priority list 
of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) and supported by the European Commission, helping to reduce Moldova’s 
dependency on MGRES. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter The upcoming winter will be a critical test 
PAGE | 21  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
The upcoming winter will be a 
critical test  
Intensified attacks since spring  2024 have left Ukraine’s energy 
infrastructure in a very fragile state for the coming winter. Russia’s strategy 
has focused on generation and transmission assets and has used combinations 
of missiles and drones to evade Ukraine's air defences. As a result, Ukraine has 
sustained more widespread and lasting damage to its energy infrastructure 
compared with the attacks in earlier stages of the war, even with ongoing support 
for repairs from donors.  
Energy supply has already been challenging over the summer months for 
many Ukrainians, but the full effects of the infrastructure losses have been 
masked by the warm weather and longer days. Diesel generators have allowed 
shops and restaurants to stay open, with many facilities using outdoor spaces to 
help with the effects of rolling blackouts.  
However, once temperatures begin to fall and the heating season officially 
begins in October, it will become much more difficult to live and work with 
limited access to electricity and heat. Home to roughly 70% of the population, 
Ukraine's urban centres are particularly vulnerable to unreliable electricity supply, 
given the strong concentration of high- rise buildings that need electricity for 
elevators and water pumps.  
The winter season can last  for up to six months, with the coldest months 
between December to March, when temperatures can drop as low as -20 °C, 
and average between -4.8 °C and 2  °C. All regions, or oblasts,  in Ukraine 
experience days with temperatures below -10 °C during the standard heating 
season. In the current context, this would result in huge risks for people across 
the country. A period of extreme cold over the coming winter would take a massive 
toll on the overall population and put enormous pressure on the already 
overstretched health system. If the winter is accompanied by inadequate provision 
of heat or electricity, this could lead to a renewed wave of refugees moving to 
other parts of Ukraine and abroad, as some places in the country become simply 
unliveable.  
Since 2022, and especially since March 2024, Ukraine’s energy 
infrastructure has been degraded in ways that make this winter the sternest 
test yet for Ukraine’s energy system. These risks are already visible and 
foreseeable; they can be exacerbated by continued targeting of energy 
infrastructure by Russia and mitigated by successful air defence, as well as a 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter The upcoming winter will be a critical test 
PAGE | 22  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
range of other national and international actions, including expedited repair and 
reconstruction. Some of these risks spill over to Moldova, requiring a coordinated, 
regional approach.  
The key risks are the following: 
• A growing deficit of electricity supply relative to much higher winter 
demand. Peak demand is expected to increase to 18.5  GW this winter (from 
around 12 GW in the summer). Despite the return to service of nuclear units 
from maintenance over the summer and an expected 1.7 GW of electricity 
imported from the European Union, the deficit of electricity supply could reach 
as much as 6 GW, an amount equivalent to Denmark’s peak demand
11. Since 
March, rolling blackouts that have left households without electricity for hours 
every day have been faced with solidarity by citizens, but longer electricity cuts 
in the winter months will lead to enormous strains , including on centralised 
water supply. Repair and reconstruction work is ongoing, but it may be 
impossible to bring back a significant portion of the lost assets. T here is also 
the risk that damage  from new Russian attacks outpaces the speed at which 
infrastructure can be repaired, undermining system stability even further. 
Estimated electricity deficit versus peak demand in Ukraine in summer 2024 and for the 
winter of 2024-25 
 
 
• Inability to provide district heating to major cities. Regions close to the front 
lines are the most vulnerable, as most attacks on heating infrastructure have 
occurred in these areas. The Kharkiv region has been without large-scale heat 
generating capacity following the destruction of the Zmiivska thermal power 
 
 
11 Source: IEA analysis based on exchanges with ENTSO-E, the European Commission and papers by Green Deal Ukraïna 
(Six options to boost power grid transfers from continental Europe to Ukraine, for the next two winters, August 2024; Modelling 
the Electricity Deficit in Ukraine and Potential Policy Responses for the period June 2024 – May 2025, June 2024). 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Peak demand Deficit Available supply Estimated peak
demand
Deficit Estimated
available supply
Summer 2024 Winter 2024-25
Imports
2.3 GW
5.8 GW
GW

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter The upcoming winter will be a critical test 
PAGE | 23  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
plant and Kharkiv CHP -5 plant in late March.  Other frontline regions 
(particularly Chernihiv, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia, Sumy and Mykolaiv) have also 
suffered severe damage to their heat generation capacities. Heat supply is  at 
risk as well in Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, where 98% of the population is connected 
to the district heating grid and three large CHP plants provide the bulk of supply 
during the winter months. 
• Possible need for gas imports to ease strains on the gas supply balance. 
Ukraine’s may require additional imports during the coming heating season. 
While under average weather conditions Ukraine could potentially meet all its 
demand requirements from domestic production and storage, a colder -than-
average winter could increase import requirements through the heating season, 
assuming that heating intensity
12 remains close to last winter’s levels. A 
particularly cold winter –  similar to the one Ukraine faced in 2016- 17 – could 
increase gas used for space heating in households by 25% (or 1.5 bcm ) 
compared with the 2023-24 winter season. The expected halt of Russian gas 
transit via Ukraine from  January 2025 will mean the end of possibilities for 
backhaul (or virtual reverse flows) from the European Union. This means 
physical west-to-east gas supplies from Central and Eastern Europe will be 
needed to bring additional gas into Ukraine, which could raise procurement 
costs (due to t ransmission tariffs). The adequacy of supply is also subject to 
risks from further attacks on gas infrastructure.  
• Disruption to prevailing gas and electricity supply arrangements in 
Moldova. The likely end of Russian gas transit across Ukraine to the region of 
Transnistria from January raises major questions over how the region  will 
receive its gas and, by extension, over the availability and cost of the electricity 
that it provides to the rest of Moldova. Russian gas delivered to Transnistria 
through a longer and more circuitous route, via Türkiye and the Western 
Balkans, would incur additional transit charges that would push up the price of 
gas to Transnistria. This would be a major shock to a region that has become 
used to getting gas at minimum or zero cost . An adjustment towards market 
prices would in turn increase electricity generation costs and the price paid by 
Moldovans for electricity, a politically and socially sensitive issue. If electricity 
production from MGRES needs to be replaced with imports from Romania, 
some 600 to 650 MW of interconnection capacity will be needed, exceeding the 
current 255 MW quota for Moldova from the allowed 1.7 GW of trade capacity 
with continental Europe that is shared between Moldova and Ukraine
13. If gas 
flows to Transnistria were interrupted for any reason (including non-payment), 
 
 
12 Heating intensity refers to natural gas use per heating degree day. 
13 The trade limit with continental Europe is shared between Ukraine and Moldova. The two countries agree bilaterally on 
how to use the capacity at a given moment in time. In case of failure to reach an agreement, the capacity is split in proportion 
to the number of interconnectors each country has, meaning that Moldova would receive one-sixth of the capacity.  

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter The upcoming winter will be a critical test 
PAGE | 24  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
this would have immediate and damaging implications for Moldova’s electricity 
supply and for Transnistria’s budget, the bulk of which comes from selling 
electricity to Moldova. The consequences would represent an additional source 
of instability for the wider region. 
The coming winter and the tense geopolitical context in the region could 
have ramifications for the energy security of other European nations. Risks 
include cyber-attacks and physical threats to critical energy infrastructure that may 
be used to supply Ukraine, requiring increased vigilance and emergency 
preparedness. There could also be implications for market balances and prices, 
although these will be determined, as ever, by multiple factors. Electricity prices in 
Europe have slightly moderated since the peaks of 2022, but wholesale electricity 
prices in Southeast Europe, in particular, remain elevated compared with pre-war 
levels. Most countries in Southeast Europe are highly reliant on gas for electricity 
generation, and over the summer months tight gas markets have combined with 
congested energy corridors, warm weather and low hydropower generation, 
resulting in notable price disparities with the rest of Europe.  
This winter will also see the scheduled decoupling of the electricity systems of the 
Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania from Russia- Belarus on 7 February 
2025, prior to synchronisation with continental Europe. Following synchronisation, 
the energy security of the Baltic states will be strongly dependent on imports from 
neighbouring countries Poland, Sweden and Finland. While the Baltic 
transmission system operators ( TSOs) have deployed much of the necessary 
equipment to ensure stable, independent operation, the full reinforcement of 
interconnectors and required IT system upgrades are set to take place  between 
2025 to 2030.  In the meantime, t here will be a lack of redundancy  in the single 
synchronous interconnection with Poland, which will be the only link between the 
Baltic grid and the continental Europe system u ntil these upgrades and 
reinforcements are complete.  
 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 25  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
An energy action plan 
This section proposes ten actions that can help to address Ukraine’s 
pressing energy security vulnerabilities. Many of these measures are already 
underway or under consideration, but time is of the essence. They focus on issues 
directly related to the energy sector, but a first-order consideration and priority for 
the upcoming winter is to counter further attacks and avoid or minimise further 
damage to infrastructure by providing effective air defence. 
The energy sector measures respond to an immediate need, but where 
possible, they are designed with a view to structural changes that will 
increase Ukraine’s resilience over time. Ukraine’s energy system faces an 
emergency, and any effective solution needs to be on the table, but there are still 
possibilities to prepare for a different and more sustainable energy system for 
Ukraine and avoid becoming stuck in a repeated loop of damage and repair to 
existing assets. The actions proposed below encompass immediate measures to 
enhance resilience (1, 2), actions focused on the electricity sector (3 , 4), energy 
efficiency (5), heat (6) and natural gas (7, 8), as well as the need to factor in 
implications for Moldova (9) and integrate short-term responses with medium-term 
goals (10).  
Action 1 – Bolster the physical and cyber security of 
Ukraine's energy infrastructure 
As Ukraine repairs and reconstructs its energy infrastructure, build in a high 
level of physical and cyber security. Ukraine’s historically centralised system 
for the provision of power and heat, based on a relatively small number of large 
assets, makes it vulnerable to Russian attack. R estoration of vital infrastructure 
such as generation capacity and grid infrastructure, especially at crucial nodes in 
the system like the network substations near nuclear power plants , needs to be 
accompanied by efforts to bolster the resilience of the system , based on an 
assessment of key system vulnerabilities, comprehensive costing that includes 
physical and cyber protection measures, and a broadening of options to include 
more decentralised generation and distributed energy resources.  
Expand and intensify the construction of anti-drone protection measures for 
critical energy infrastructure, including high- voltage equipment. 
Reconstruction and restoration efforts for Ukraine’s  energy infrastructure, in 
particular power and heating (via cogeneration) systems, need to include “passive 
defence,” including fortification, concealment and other defence measures against 
modern military technologies – especially drones – that are used to identify and 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 26  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
destroy energy infrastructure. Greater investment in measures such as cement 
fortifications, cage roofs and sandbags, as well as moving equipment underground 
that does not need access to outside airflow, can make key assets more resilient. 
Installing air defence capabilities at the most critical energy generation and 
storage facilities could further maintain and strengthen security.  
Assist Ukraine in bolstering its defences against cyberattacks, which can be 
as damaging as physical attacks.  Attempted cyberattacks against energy 
infrastructure have tripled since the beginning of the invasion and remain a 
permanent threat. Assistance should intensify as the Ukrainian power system 
builds more decentralised generation and cogeneration capacity. This is changing 
the power system from one whose Soviet-era characteristics are well understood 
by Russia to one that is significantly more secure, resilient and flexible. However, 
its expanded digital footprint opens up a range of potential vulnerabilities in the 
absence of appropriate cyber security measures. Ukrenergo has made impressive 
progress in this area, but enhanced access to world- leading expertise and 
technology is needed to help Ukraine establish strong safeguards for the digital 
security of its energy system.  
Action 2 – Expedite the delivery of equipment and spare 
parts 
Expand and accelerate the supply of replacement equipment and 
technology for damaged facilities . The donation, sale or lease of essential 
equipment – such as transformers, generators, spare parts and other critical 
components – has been an essential component of international support to 
Ukraine. This is more urgent than ever. Clear  prioritisation of Ukraine’s needs, 
alongside standardisation of technologies on the ground , can help minimise 
downtime for both network and generation-level assets. Key partner-led initiatives 
provide platform s to centrali se financial support and coordinate the supply of 
necessary equipment. The Energy Community’s Ukraine Energy Support Fund
, 
for example,  enables governments, international financial institutions and 
international organizations as well as corporate donors to provide financial support 
to the Ukrainian energy sector’s efforts to repair damage and keep functioning, 
while t he G7+ Energy Coordination Group is working closely with donors to 
mobilise equipment donations, ensuring that Ukraine has the resources needed 
to repair, restore and defend its energy infrastructure. The USAID Energy Security 
Project has been working to support Ukraine's energy sector resilience, 
collaborating with the Ukrainian government and utilities to repair and stabilise the 
energy sector. Increasing production and stockpiling replacement parts for key 
energy infrastructure in neighbouring countries can aid rapid restoration and 
repairs. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 27  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Streamline procedures for cross- border equipment import. T he process of 
importing critical energy equipment into Ukraine has faced administrative  
challenges that have slowed down repairs and the deployment of distributed 
energy resources. Supply chain and procurement bottlenecks have also hindered 
the ability of donors to respond quickly to Ukraine's needs. Recognizing this , the 
Ukrainian government removed import duties and value- added tax ( VAT) on 
certain energy equipment in July 2024. Quickly implementing these changes and 
considering extensions to include all critical components, such as the main 
components of wind turbines, will shorten timelines for the repair and retooling of 
Ukraine’s energy infrastructure. A clear priority list of equipment needs can serve 
as guidance to the Ukrainian authorities for those items that need streamline d 
import procedures. 
Provide technical expertise and training to Ukraine’s energy workforce to 
help them  manage and repair a system operating under severe stress. 
Ukrainian energy professionals – both the existing workforce and new recruits –  
need to be well-equipped to operate, maintain and restore energy infrastructure.  
Technical expertise and training for  Ukrainian energy engineers and technicians 
is crucial to enhance their capacity to deal with increasingly challenging conditions. 
This needs to include advice and expertise on managing the transition to a more 
decentralised model.  
Action 3 – Increase and decentralise power supply 
Deploy decentralised generation capacity as quickly as possible. Alongside 
the diesel generators that are widely deployed already as back-up for grid supply, 
this should include small -scale gas-fired combined heat and power plants  (< 40 
MW), solar PV 14 and wind systems, a s well as  batteries and other storage 
technologies. Solar PV and batteries, including behind-the-meter installations, can 
be deployed quickly with the right incentives in place, allowing them to help meet 
energy needs while increasing the physical resilience of the system. Supportive 
regulatory changes are needed to accelerate the connection of new resources and 
energy storage, including innovative approaches, such as non-firm connections in 
congested areas. Off-grid and mini-grid solutions should be part of the solution.  
Working with partners to provide back -up generation for water supply, mobile 
networks and hospitals will also be key to ensuring resilience for critical 
infrastructure. 
Coordinate decentralisation efforts with the availability of existing networks, 
while considering  flexibility needs for system balancing . The country's 
 
 
14 Solar PV production potential is lowest during winter months, particularly in December and January, when capacity factors 
drop to below 10%. As a result, complementary energy technologies, such as wind or batteries, and dispatchable generation, 
e.g. gas-fired plants, are essential to maintain reliable supply. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 28  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
extensive gas network offers multiple potential sites for small-scale gas turbines, 
providing a flexible and resilient source of power generation that can help to 
integrate variable renewables. This decentralisation has to align with gas network 
and flows, and it must consider the prospective halt to transit flows from January 
2025 and a constrained domestic gas market.  
Action 4 – Enhance electricity transmission capacity with 
the European Union 
Increase electricity imports from the European Union  to Ukraine. Ukraine is 
interconnected with continental Europe through Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and 
Romania, and via  Moldova. The current firm transmission capacity for trade 
towards Ukraine and Moldova is 1700 MW and can be complemented, when the 
network allows, with a non-firm emergency inter-TSO agreement that can provide 
additional support for a few hours. In June, Ukraine’s total import was close to 
2000 MW for a few hours every day, triggering a request from Ukraine and 
Moldova to further raise the trade limit. The transmission capacity is mainly 
constrained by grid congestions in neighbouring countries and in Ukraine, where 
constant network repairs are required to keep imports at their current levels. 
Enhance short-term transmission capacity. TSOs aim to maximise  the 
available capacity from continental Europe to Ukraine and Moldova by increasing 
the frequency of calculations to a monthly basis, with automated calculations 
including remedial actions for congestions , starting from  November. Most 
observers expect this improved process to deliver an increase of the capacity by 
around 200-300 MW. While this represents a clear improvement to the current 
situation, further improvements can and should be made. Increasing the frequency 
of capacity calculations to weekly or daily could enable more capacity to be made 
available part of the time. EU legislation requires TSOs to minimise the risk to their 
system when calculating available capacities, thereby making available cross -
border capacity the outcome of a calculation that is risk-averse by design. Political 
support for accepting higher risk on the EU side should enable making more 
interconnection capacity available. In parallel, innovative technologies , including 
software solutions such as dynamic line rating, could be deployed in a matter of 
months and deliver higher capacities during cold or windy conditions. 
Address regulatory impacts on import demand. Ukrainian demand for 
interconnection capacity is influenced by a rule exempting industrial consumers 
from rolling blackouts if they secure 80% of their power consumption from direct  
 
 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 29  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
imports15. The impact of this  rule on import patterns and grid efficiency warrants  
further examination to assess if it does not lead to inefficient demand for the 
already constrained interconnection capacity. 
Action 5 – Engage consumers in energy saving and 
demand response, while continuing investments in 
energy efficiency  
Implement immediate energy-saving measures to improve energy security 
and thermal comfort . There are quick, low -cost actions that can improve 
efficiency in r esidential buildings , which account for close to one -third of the  
country’s total final energy consumption. S upport of simple weatherisation 
measures – such as weatherstripping windows and doors, minimising air leaks in 
buildings, and replacing inefficient windows and doors – can help to reduce heat 
losses by up to 30%. Lowering the default heating temperature for district heating, 
as well as (even localised) insulation of district heating pipes, can help improve 
the reliability of service and provide quick energy savings.  
Launch energy efficiency campaigns to raise awareness of  short-term 
measures that citizens can take to keep warm. The Ministry of Energy, Ministry 
of Infrastructure and Ministry of Environmental Protection have special teams 
focusing on behavioural  campaigns. The State Energy Efficiency Agency has 
conducted energy efficiency campaigns including public service announcements, 
social media outreach and partnerships with local community groups. Redesigning 
these existing measures to reflect the current situation that consumers face, in 
conjunction with the provision of energy-saving products and services, can lead to 
a reduction in energy consumption and mitigate the impact of energy shortages. 
Swift action is required to be prepared for the winter ahead. The initial focus should 
be on short-term, easy-to-implement measures for immediate impact and to help 
in case of grid failure, but they should also include longer-term structural measures 
to help improve efficiency. Engaging with multiple stakeholders, including media, 
utilities, community groups and business organisations, will help the campaign 
reach as many Ukrainian households as possible.  
Enable demand response to help balance supply and demand . Clear price 
signals during shortages and transparent communication towards energy 
consumers are crucial. Analy sing potential demand-saving options ahead of the 
winter period can help to ensure the appropriate design  of emergency demand-
side policy measures and awareness-raising campaigns. Metering improvements 
are necessary for this winter and beyond. Consumer protection can be maintained 
 
 
15 Another rule exists that also exempts industrial consumers from rolling blackouts if they self -produce 80% of their power 
consumption.  

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 30  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
through reform of the price cap in the Ukrainian electricity market , introducing 
instead a system whereby a social consumption volume is charged at a subsidized 
rate, after which consumers pay the market price. 
Action 6 – Prepare back-up options for winter heating 
Expedite the delivery of small CHP (combined heat and power)  units, 
prioritising the worst -hit areas. Reinforcing Ukraine’s heat ing infrastructure 
ahead of the winter requires a localised approach, focusing on the most affected 
regions, such as Kharkiv, Mykolaiv and Sumy. By the end of July 2024, Kharkiv 
had installed 22 cogeneration units and 31 autonomous boiler houses, but the city 
needs as many as 140 units (with a total capacity of 340 MW) to ensure adequate 
heat supply this winter. Kyiv’s municipally-owned Kyivteploenergo has ordered 15 
small CHP units (with a combined capacity of 60 MW), but they will not be 
delivered until December 2025 – too late to supply heat this winter. To the extent 
possible, Ukraine should expedite and prioriti se these deliveries with the help of 
international partners. Industrial-scale heat pumps could also play a useful role in 
some areas, although these systems are more feasible for baseload heat supply 
than as a backup due to their high capital cost , and they rely on electr icity to 
operate. Though outside the scope of this report, humanitarian assistance, such 
as heating tents and the distribution of thermal blankets, proved vital in alleviating 
hardship during the previous two winters and should continue to complement the 
energy-related actions. 
Distribute backup heating equipment in rural areas.  In addition to procuring 
small CHP units, Ukraine should prepare reliable backup heating options . This 
might include LPG heaters, packaged boiler systems, hot water tanks and, given 
the emergency conditions,  wood stoves and coal stoves for rural areas, though 
the health and fire hazards associated with stoves  require careful consideration. 
These measures can help ensure sufficient heat supply even in the event of gas 
and power cuts. Electric boilers coupled with thermal energy storage could be a 
suitable backup option in areas where the power supply is stable or in surplus. 
Deploying small-scale CHPs and decentralized heating solutions could bolster the 
resilience of Ukraine’s heating network against targeted Russian strikes on energy 
infrastructure. 
Action 7 – Build up natural gas storage levels 
Ensure that Ukrainian storage sites are filled up to adequate levels ahead of 
the heating season. Storage sites play a key role in meeting Ukraine’s natural 
gas demand over the winter  and in preserving its ability to react to unexpected 
demand and/or supply shocks . We estimate that net storage withdrawals met 
around 30% of Ukraine’s natural gas demand requirements over the 2023- 24 
heating season. Ukraine reduced its gas storage target from 14.7 bcm ahead of 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 31  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
the 2023-24 winter to 13.2 bcm ahead of the 2024-25 heating season and needs 
to ensure, with international support, that the revised target is met in full.  
To accelerate storage injections, Ukraine could require additional piped gas 
imports from the European Union; international partners should continue to 
support Ukraine in building- up adequate inventory levels.  We estimate that 
Ukraine would need around 0.6 bcm of imports in September and October to reach 
its storage target ahead of 1 November. International support, including via loans 
and grants, is needed support Ukrainian gas companies to ramp-up their imports 
ahead of this  winter season and to enhance i nterconnectivity with the rest of 
Europe ahead of forthcoming winters . Based on spot prices at the beginning of 
September, the cost of procuring 0. 6 bcm of natural gas would be just over 
EUR 250 million. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD) signed an agreement on a EUR 200 million loan under government 
guarantees in November 2023 to support the creation of strategic gas reserves. 
The corresponding agreement on guarantees was signed i n July 2024,  and 
Naftogaz started buying natural gas using the loan in August 2024. AggregateEU, 
the EU’s demand aggregation and joint purchasing platform, could also be a 
mechanism to support Ukraine’s natural gas procurement.  
Action 8 – Strengthen firm gas import capacities from 
the European Union 
Ensure and strengthen long-term firm import capacities from the European 
Union to bolster Ukraine’s access to  natural gas. Ukraine has around 60 
million cubic metres per day (mcm per day) of import capacity from the European 
Union today. However, some of this capacity cannot be considered as available  
on a long-term, firm basis. Ukraine and its European partners should work together 
to ensure that firm capacity offerings are extended and ensured ahead of 
forthcoming winter seasons. 
• Slovakia: Between February 2022 and March 2024, the Slovak gas 
transmission system operator (TSO) Eustream increased firm exit capacity to 
Ukraine from 27 mcm per day to 42 mcm per day. Since 1 April 2024, the firm 
capacity has been reduced to 27 mcm per day. 
• Hungary: Since January 2022, Hungary’s gas TSO offered over  9 mcm per 
day of firm exit capacity towards Ukraine.  However, this agreement is set to 
expire starting from 1 January 2025. Parties need to work together to evaluate 
options on how the offer of firm capacity can be extended.  
• Poland: Firm capacity between Poland and Ukraine is not provided on a 
permanent basis, though there is  capacity of over 6 mcm per day . This 
capacity is offered as interruptible under long products (yearly, quarterly and 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 32  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
monthly products), although it can be offered as firm capacity on daily and 
intraday auctions. TSOs should consider options offering firm capacity 
products on a long-term basis, at least for the upcoming winter season.  
Operating the Trans -Balkan pipeline system in reverse would further 
enhance Ukraine’s natural gas supply security.  Ukraine already imported 
0.5 bcm of natural gas via the Trans -Balkan pipeline in 2023, according to 
Ukraine’s gas TSO. However, the current high tariffs are discouraging the use of 
this route. This situation requires a structural regional approach involving all 
relevant stakeholders. The countries along the Trans -Balkan pipeline system 
(Bulgaria, Romania, Moldova and Ukraine) should work together to develop a 
more competitive transmission tariff structure and further harmonise gas qualities. 
Market participants are also evaluating a potential expansion of reverse capacity 
over the medium -term. The Gas TSO of Ukraine and Moldova’s 
“Vestmoldtransgaz” are working to enhance the firm capacities of gas 
transmission along the Trans-Balkan route towards Ukraine from 1 mcm per day 
to at least 7 mcm per day by April 2025. 
Action 9 – Coordinate approaches to Ukraine and 
Moldova 
Carefully manage the knock- on effects of the situation in Ukraine for 
Moldova over the coming winter, including the halt of transit flows. While not 
subject to the same physical risks from Russian shelling, the coming winter could 
also be destabilising in Moldova, including Transnistria, as gas and electricity flows 
and relationships move across to a new footing. This requires integrated strategies 
for the broader region that recognise the risks to gas and electricity security in 
Moldova and act in an early  and coordinated manner to mitigate them. Moldova 
will need to be adequately prepared for the winter in terms of gas, with adequate 
storage levels in nearby markets such as Romania and Ukraine. In addition, taking 
advantage of all possible import routes for gas , including the Trans -Balkan 
pipeline, will be key to securing stable flows. A continued and transparent dialogue 
with international financial institutions and donors is needed to ensure stable gas 
supplies for the winter season and to manage the implications of any price 
increases as the Gazprom transit agreement comes to an end.  
Accelerate structural changes, including renewables deployment, grid 
upgrades and energy efficiency improvements in Moldova.  Moldova is 
moving to accelerate deployment of utility -scale wind and solar, with 165  MW of 
tenders launched in August  2024. Boosting energy efficiency, particularly in 
buildings and industry, through updated regulations and incentives  can likewise 
help to balance the energy relationship with the Transnistrian region by reducing 
reliance on electricity from MGRES  and improve national and regional energy  
 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 33  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
security. Given that transmission capacity with  the continental Europe system is 
shared between Ukraine and Moldova, any improvement to Moldova’s electricity 
security is also beneficial  to Ukraine. In case of shortages in Moldova, the two 
countries need to agree to a distribution of imports . By default, one -sixth of the 
available capacity would be allocated to Moldova, proportional to the number of 
interconnectors. 
Enhance Moldova’s energy connectivity  with its neighbours.  Stronger 
coordination between Ukrainian and Moldovan TSOs with their neighbours – 
notably through accelerated transposition and the implementation of 
EU 
provisions on el ectricity integration – can help prioritise and accelerate the 
construction of new interconnectors and transmission lines that will strongly 
benefit both Ukraine and Moldova, as well as broader European energy security. 
New 400 kV lines are planned between Romania, Ukraine and Moldova that are 
scheduled to start operation between 2025 and 2031. 
Action 10 – Lay the groundwork for a modern, market-
based, resilient and sustainable post-war energy system, 
well integrated with the European Union 
The immediate priority for action must be to mitigate the extreme risks over 
the 2024-25 winter season. But it will also be vital to start actions that have 
a longer lead time and to integrate, wherever possible, a vision for a new 
Ukrainian energy system into the response. While Ukraine’s most urgent 
concern remains the welfare and safety of its citizens through the upcoming winter, 
there is a strong need to put foundations in place for future winters  and to meet 
the longer-term needs of Ukraine’s  energy sector  by adopting measures that 
facilitate system security, affordability and sustainability , and the country’s  
ambition to develop its potential as a supplier of clean energy . These measures 
should support Ukraine’s drive to integrate into the broader European system, as 
set out in its commitment under the Energy Community framework to align with 
EU energy legislation in the context of EU accession talks. The government’s work 
to develop a 2050 Energy Strategy and a National Energy and Climate Plan 
through 2030 are important steps, which now need to be underpinned, wherever 
possible, with implementation strategies that prioritise a favourable regulatory 
environment for investment.  
Integrate longer -term viability and affordability into decision- making on 
short-term assets. Emergency situations require emergency measures to limit, 
as much as possible, the impact of continued Russian attacks on the provision of 
electricity and heat. These include creative solutions , such as the transfer of 
decommissioned equipment from Ukraine’s European neighbours. However, 
investment in new capacity and the restoration of either damaged or destroyed 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 34  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
assets may impose unwanted long-term consequences on Ukrainian consumers 
if they come with very high operating costs. Longer-term viability should be a factor 
in near-term decision-making. 
Reinforce the transmission corridors with neighbouring grids to enable 
increased exports to Ukraine and Moldova. Two late submissions were added 
to the list of projects in the ongoing cycle of ENTSO -E’s Ten -Year Network 
Development Plan to reinforce the interconnections of Ukraine with Slovakia and 
Romania, with completion expected in 2026-27. In the context of winter 2025-26, 
further efforts could be made to increase the firm capacity by deploying phase-
shifting transformers, upgrading equipment , reconduct oring and deploying 
software solutions, such as dynamic line rating, on congested corridors. Together 
with early commissioning of planned reinforcements, imports could be increased 
by over 1 GW bef ore winter 2025- 26. In parallel, the market coupling process in 
Eastern Europe should be sped up to maximise the utilisation of cross -border 
capacity, based on the EU and Energy Community regulatory framework and 
building on the work of the relevant High-Level Working Group. 
Incentivise private investment in the energy sector . Ukraine's goal of 
modernising its energy system and increasing its resilience will require the 
engagement and support of private investors, and they will require an appropriate 
level of risk-adjusted return. This means bringing down risks that can affect such 
investments though a clear  policy vision, a readiness to work with the private 
sector, and a commitment to transparency, regulatory stability and predictability 
over time. In the power sector, for example, key issues include sector regulation, 
the reliability of revenues – dependent mainly on the off -taker’s ability to pay on 
time – and the availability of transmission infrastructure or land, as well as how all 
these issues are defined in contracts. The reliability and credibility of the offtake 
system can be bolstered by new risk -sharing facilities backed by international 
partners and/or the government. Political risk can be mitigated by international 
mechanisms that protect against losses, as well as by export credit agencies like 
the Danish Export and Investment Fund or the US International Development 
Finance Corporation.  
Move towards cost-reflective tariffs for electricity and heat, with appropriate 
safeguards for vulnerable households.  Price caps in wholesale markets or 
other regulatory measures that hinder the incentive for private investment in new 
assets, including price caps for ancillary services, should be reviewed and, where 
possible, reduced or eliminated. In the place of broad price caps, the regulator 
should consider retail tariffs designed to protect vulnerable consumers. Cost -
reflective tariffs, allied with other supportive regulatory provisions, are instrumental 
to support  investment in new infrastructure for power and heat, including 
distributed energy resources, and to encourage more efficient and system-friendly 
electricity consumption.  

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 35  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Prioritise investments in energy efficiency . Almost 80% of the residential 
building stock  in  Ukraine was categorised as  energy inefficient  as of 2021.  
Increasing the energy efficiency of the existing building stock, particularly by 
targeting building fabric improvements, could halve their energy consumption.  
New construction, r econstruction of buildings damaged during the war , and the 
renovation of existing buildings should be carried out with a view to embedding 
high efficiency standards in buildings. Projects of the Energy Efficiency Fund of 
Ukraine and the recently established State Fund for Decarbonization and Energy 
Efficient Transformation s hould provide financial mechanisms to improve the 
efficiency of buildings. 
Accelerate the modernisation of  Ukraine’s heating system s. The 
modernisation of Ukraine’s district heating network is long overdue and needs to 
be accelerated in conjunction with the modernisation of the country’s building 
stock. Much of Ukraine’s heating equipment and infrastructure  is close to, or 
beyond, the end of its design life and network losses (at over 20 %, even before 
the full-scale invasion) are more than double the typical losses in EU countries. 
According to a government estimate, about 44% of the district heating network is 
dilapidated. The lack of investment in the heating grid, combined with poor end-
use energy efficiency, means that more than half of the fuel currently used to 
produce heat is wasted
16. The Ministry of Infrastructure has already developed a 
thermal modernisation strategy through 2030 and a Priority Action Plan, adopted 
in February 2024, includes a draft resolution to improve energy efficiency in 
buildings and reduce heat losses from the sector , with a focus on upgrading the 
building envelope and heating systems and integrating renewable energy . This 
now needs a more detailed roadmap of measures to support its implementation  
Implement smart meters for electricity and universal heat metering.  
Developing a plan to roll out smart meters and adding demand-response devices 
to major electricity appliances and equipment can lay the groundwork for future 
automated demand response programs for load management and reducing peak 
demand. Ukraine’s ongoing efforts to implement universal heat metering should 
be continued, and heat tariffs should enable consumption- based billing to 
encourage the installation of automated meters and end -user t emperature 
controls in buildings. 
Ensure that strong corporate governance standards are upheld to maintain 
energy sector stability and investor confidence. Maintaining and strengthening 
corporate governance for Ukraine's energy companies in accordance with OECD 
and EU standards will allow for smoother cooperation with European institutions 
 
 
16 The energy saving potential from upgrading district heating systems in Ukraine is substantial. A renovation project in Odesa 
demonstrated a 50% reduction in total energy consumption,  a 30% reduction in direct system costs, a 40% reduction in 
electricity costs, and 95%  water consumption. 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter An energy action plan 
PAGE | 36  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
and investors. A near-term priority is to ensure that equipment procurement and 
imports can ramp up  and that donations are managed efficiently . Implementing 
best practices for transparency is essential, as is ensuring the independence of 
corporate boards.  
Utilise Ukraine’s significant potential for biogas and biomethane production. 
Incentives to promote investment in biogas and biomethane- based installations 
(including for combined heat and power generation) could provide an alternative 
to natural gas -based district heating systems and increase the resilience of 
Ukraine’s heat supply in the face of ongoing gas supply security risks. Ukraine has 
two operational biomethane plants and several under construction, according to 
the country’s industry group. It plans to open ten new facilities with a capacity of 
1.5 million cubic meters per year in 2024- 25. This work could build on the 2023 
EU-Ukraine Memorandum of Understanding on a Strategic Partnership on 
Biomethane and Hydrogen.  
Integrate the Ukrainian gas storage system in the European and global gas 
market. Ukraine has the largest natural gas storage capacity in Europe, at about 
30 bcm. Most of its storage sites  are located in the western part of the country, 
close to the European Union, and Ukraine has offered 10 bcm of storage capacity 
to European market players. Ukrtransgaz, the storage system operator, 
underwent successful certification according to new EU rules in 2023. That year, 
European companies stored around 2.5 bcm in Ukrainian storage sites, although 
they significantly reduced their storage operations in 2024 due to ongoing security 
issues. In addition to enhancing European gas supply security, storing natural gas 
in Ukraine provides much-needed income to Ukraine’s storage system operator.   
Enable Ukrainian citizens to gain the most from their energy system  and 
engage them in the process of change, while managing the system’s use 
and cost. Energy efficiency policies that prioritise people can build connections 
between energy consumers and the energy system – a vital element in achieving 
quick short-term actions, but also in meeting longer term energy transition goals. 
Policies must be designed with the Ukrainian people at the centre, allowing  
Ukrainians – as consumers, producers, operators or users – to engage with and 
benefit from their energy system. Potential actions include the upscaling of energy 
efficiency skills, capacity-building measures (education, training and mentorship), 
the provision of clear  and consumer-friendly energy-related product information 
(labels on energy use, rating,  etc.) at or before the purchasing stage, and t he 
inclusion of behavioural insights in the design of energy efficiency policy.   
 

A nnexes 
PAGE | 37  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter 
Annexes 
Ukraine's energy background 
Prior to Russia’s 2022 invasion, Ukraine’s energy system depended primarily on 
fossil fuels and nuclear energy. Total energy supply totalled 88 million tonnes of 
oil equivalent (Mtoe) in 2021, with oil, natural gas and coal accounting for nearly 
70%, and nuclear power for around 25%.
17 Coal, nuclear and most renewable 
energy sources were used for the most part in power generation, while oil and gas 
were used primarily in the end-use sectors. Ukraine produces significant quantities 
of coal and natural gas, but domestic production has historically not been enough 
to cover demand. In 2021, domestic energy production totalled 55 Mtoe, or almost 
two-thirds (62%) of the country’s total supply. Although renewable energy sources 
contributed only modestly to the energy mix, solar and wind power generation had 
been expanding quickly from a low base. 
Total final consumption (TFC) was 49 Mtoe in 2021, with natural gas accounting 
for 27%, electricity and oil for 21% each, heat for 15%, coal for 11% and bioenergy 
for 5%. The industry sector was responsible for 39% of TFC, followed by the 
residential sector (28%), transport (19%) and services and other sectors (13%).  
Before 2022, nuclear power generated half of the country’s electricity, followed by 
coal-fired plants at 23% and gas-fired plants at 9%. Renewable energy contributed 
to 11% of the mix, with hydropower comprising the largest share at 6.5%, followed 
by solar  (4.2%) and wind (2%). Ukraine's power generation capacity was the 
seventh largest in Europe, with a nominal capacity of 56 GW, which  allowed 
Ukraine to export electricity to neighbouring European countries until late 2022. 
Before 2022, natural gas was the second- largest element in Ukraine’s primary 
energy mix behind oil, with a share of around 28% of  the total. Most of this gas 
went to produce heat and power, which accounted for 38% of total gas demand, 
followed by consumption in the residential sector (27%) and by industry (21%). 
Ukraine traditionally met its gas needs through a combination of domestic 
production and gas imports from Russia. However, the gas relationship with 
Russia was a consistent source of tension and ins tability. Ukraine stopped direct 
gas imports from Russia in November 2015, replacing some of it with  indirect 
imports via the European Union. Coal imports grew after Ukraine lost control of its 
17 Source: IEA (2022), World Energy Statistics and Balances (database). 

Ukraine’s Energy Security and the Coming Winter Annexes 
PAGE | 38  
I EA. CC BY 4.0. 
main coal mining region in the Donbass after 2014;  it moved from being almost 
self-sufficient in coal to being a major importer (40% of coal supply). 
Defining cross-border electricity capacity 
limits 
The calculation of cross-border capacity limits by t ransmission system operators 
(TSOs) involves careful balancing between maximi sing cross -border electricity 
flows and maintaining grid reliability. The key risks TSOs manage in this process 
are system instability and grid congestions, which can arise from unexpected 
power flows and equipment failures.  
Since the grid in continental Europe is highly meshed, the power flows between 
two countries can affect, and be affected by, grid conditions in neighbouring 
countries. As required by EU legislation, cross-border capacities are co-ordinated 
at the regional level by Regional Coordination Centres , but the process is only 
starting for the newly-connected Ukraine and Moldova. Capacities are calculated 
for each direction separately . As of today, Ukraine and Moldova share a single 
area for the capacity calculations, meaning that the trade limit of 1.7 GW applies 
to the imports of both countries together, through the grids of Poland, Slovakia, 
Hungary and Romania. In the other direction (Ukraine and Moldova exporting to 
Europe), the current limit is set to 550 MW, due to stability risks for the 
interconnected system. 
The transmission capacity calculation relies on system models and forecasts 
about resources and network availability. For borders within the EU, the 
calculations are performed at regular intervals to assess the limits valid for various 
durations, from yearly down to intradaily values. Capacities available for trade tend 
to be higher closer to the time of delivery given the higher certainty of the forecasts. 
For the trade with Ukraine and Moldova, the 1.7 GW and 550 MW trade limits was 
the result of a calcul ation for a long- term commitment  with complete network 
availability, taking into account likely outages outside of wartimes . TSOs are 
currently proceeding towards a monthly capacity calculation that may deliver more 
capacity, in the order of magnitude of 200 to 300 MW, thanks to a shorter duration 
of the commitment and the incorporation of available remedial actions. 
 
 

International Energy Agency (IEA)
This work reflects the views of the IEA Secretariat but does not 
necessarily reflect those of the IEA’s individual member countries or of 
any particular funder or collaborator. The work does not constitute 
professional advice on any specific issue or situation. The IEA makes 
no representation or warranty, express or implied, in respect of the 
work’s contents (including its completeness or accuracy) and shall not 
be responsible for any use of, or reliance on, the work.  
Subject to the IEA’s Notice for CC-licenced Content, this work 
is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International Licence.
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the 
status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of 
international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, 
city or area.
Unless otherwise indicated, all material presented in figures and tables is 
derived from IEA data and analysis.
IEA Publications 
International Energy Agency 
Website: www.iea.org 
Contact information: www.iea.org/contact 
Typeset in France by IEA - September 2024
Cover design: IEA
Photo credits: © Shutterstock


