AI Act | Shaping Europe’s digital future 

 Skip to main content 

 en Select your language
 Close 
 bg български 
 es español 
 cs čeština 
 da dansk 
 de Deutsch 
 et eesti 
 el ελληνικά 
 en English 
 fr français 
 ga Gaeilge 
 hr hrvatski 
 it italiano 
 lv latviešu 
 lt lietuvių 
 hu magyar 
 mt Malti 
 nl Nederlands 
 pl polski 
 pt português 
 ro română 
 sk slovenčina 
 sl slovenščina 
 fi suomi 
 sv svenska 

 Search 
 Search 

 Shaping Europe’s digital future

 Menu Close Menu
 Back Previous items Next items Home 
 Policies 
 Activities 
 News 
 Library 
 Funding 
 Calendar 
 Consultations 
 AI Office 

 Home 
 … 
 Policies 
 Artificial Intelligence 
 European approach to artificial intelligence 
 AI Act 
 AI Act 

 The AI Act is the first-ever legal framework on AI, which addresses the risks of AI and positions Europe to play a leading role globally.

 The AI Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence) is the first-ever comprehensive legal framework on AI worldwide. The aim of the rules is to foster trustworthy AI in Europe. For any questions on the AI Act , check out the AI Act Single Information platform .

 The AI Act sets out a risk-based rules for AI developers and deployers regarding specific uses of AI. The AI Act is part of a wider package of policy measures to support the development of trustworthy AI, which also includes the AI Continent Action Plan , the  AI Innovation Package and the launch of AI Factories . Together, these measures guarantee safety, fundamental rights and human-centric AI, and strengthen uptake, investment and innovation in AI across the EU.

 To facilitate the transition to the new regulatory framework, the Commission has launched the  AI Pact , a voluntary initiative that seeks to support the future implementation, engage with stakeholders and invite AI providers and deployers from Europe and beyond to comply with the key obligations of the AI Act ahead of time. In parallel, the AI Act Service Desk is also providing information and support for a smooth and effective implementation of the AI Act across the EU.

 Why do we need rules on AI?

 The AI Act ensures that Europeans can trust what AI has to offer. While most AI systems pose limited to no risk and can contribute to solving many societal challenges, certain AI systems create risks that we must address to avoid undesirable outcomes.

 For example, it is often not possible to find out why an AI system has made a decision or prediction and taken a particular action. So, it may become difficult to assess whether someone has been unfairly disadvantaged, such as in a hiring decision or in an application for a public benefit scheme.

 Although existing legislation provides some protection, it is insufficient to address the specific challenges AI systems may bring.

 Risk-based Approach 

 Compliance and enforcement 

 Simplification of the AI Act 

 A Risk-based Approach

 The AI Act defines 4 levels of risk for AI systems:

 Unacceptable risk

 All AI systems considered a clear threat to the safety, livelihoods and rights of people are banned. The AI Act prohibits eight practices , namely:

 harmful AI-based manipulation and deception

 harmful AI-based exploitation of vulnerabilities

 social scoring

 Individual criminal offence risk assessment or prediction

 untargeted scraping of the internet or CCTV material to create or expand facial recognition databases

 emotion recognition in workplaces and education institutions

 biometric categorisation to deduce certain protected characteristics

 real-time remote biometric identification for law enforcement purposes in publicly accessible spaces

 The prohibitions became effective in February 2025. The Commission published 2 key documents to support the practical application of the prohibited practices:

 The guidelines on prohibited AI practices under the AI Act , which offer legal explanations and practical examples to help stakeholders understand and comply with the prohibitions.

 The guidelines on the AI system definition of the AI Act , to assist stakeholders in determining the scope of the AI Act

 High risk

 AI use cases that can pose serious risks to health, safety or fundamental rights are classified as high-risk. These high-risk use-cases include:

 AI safety components in critical infrastructures (e.g. transport), the failure of which could put the life and health of citizens at risk

 AI solutions used in education institutions, that may determine the access to education and course of someone’s professional life (e.g. scoring of exams)

 AI-based safety components of products (e.g. AI application in robot-assisted surgery)

 AI tools for employment, management of workers and access to self-employment (e.g. CV-sorting software for recruitment)

 Certain AI use-cases utilised to give access to essential private and public services (e.g. credit scoring denying citizens opportunity to obtain a loan)

 AI systems used for remote biometric identification, emotion recognition and biometric categorisation (e.g. AI system to retroactively identify a shoplifter)

 AI use-cases in law enforcement that may interfere with people’s fundamental rights (e.g. evaluation of the reliability of evidence)

 AI use-cases in migration, asylum and border control management (e.g. automated examination of visa applications)

 AI solutions used in the administration of justice and democratic processes (e.g. AI solutions to prepare court rulings)

 High-risk AI systems are subject to strict obligations before they can be put on the market:

 adequate risk assessment and mitigation systems

 high-quality of the datasets feeding the system to minimise risks of discriminatory outcomes

 logging of activity to ensure traceability of results

 detailed documentation providing all information necessary on the system and its purpose for authorities to assess its compliance

 clear and adequate information to the deployer

 appropriate human oversight measures

 high level of robustness, cybersecurity and accuracy

 Transparency risk

 This refers to the risks associated with a need for transparency around the use of AI. The AI Act introduces specific disclosure obligations to ensure that humans are informed when necessary to preserve trust. For instance, when using AI systems such as chatbots, humans should be made aware that they are interacting with a machine so they can take an informed decision.

 Moreover, providers of generative AI have to ensure that AI-generated content is identifiable. On top of that, certain AI-generated content should be clearly and visibly labelled, namely deep fakes and text published with the purpose to inform the public on matters of public interest.

 The transparency rules of the AI Act will come into effect in August 2026.

 Minimal or no risk

 The AI Act does not introduce rules for AI that is deemed minimal or no risk. The vast majority of AI systems currently used in the EU fall into this category. This includes applications such as AI-enabled video games or spam filters.

 How does it all work in practice for providers of high-risk AI systems?

 Once an AI system is on the market, authorities are in charge of market surveillance, deployers ensure human oversight and monitoring, and providers have a post-market monitoring system in place. Providers and deployers will also report serious incidents and malfunctioning.

 What are the rules for General-Purpose AI models?

 General-purpose AI (GPAI) models can perform a wide range of tasks and are becoming the basis for many AI systems in the EU. Some of these models could carry systemic risks if they are very capable or widely used. To ensure safe and trustworthy AI, the AI Act puts in place rules for providers of such models. This includes transparency and copyright-related rules. For models that may carry systemic risks, providers should assess and mitigate these risks. The AI Act rules on GPAI became effective in August 2025.

 Supporting compliance

 In July 2025, the Commission published 3 key instruments to support the responsible development and deployment of GPAI models:

 The Guidelines on the scope of the obligations for providers of GPAI models clarify the scope of the GPAI obligations under the AI Act, helping actors along the AI value chain understand who must comply with these obligations.

 The GPAI Code of Practice is a voluntary compliance tool submitted to the Commission by independent experts, which offers practical guidance to help providers comply with their obligations under the AI Act related to transparency, copyright, and safety & security.

 The Template for the public summary of training content of GPAI models requires providers to give an overview of the data used to train their models. This includes the sources from which the data was obtained (comprising large datasets and top domain names).The template also requests information about data processing aspects to enable parties with legitimate interests to exercise their rights under EU law.

 These tools are designed to work hand-in-hand. Together, they provide a clear and actionable framework for providers of GPAI models to comply with the AI Act, reducing administrative burden, and fostering innovation while safeguarding fundamental rights and public trust.

 The Commission is also developing support other tools that offer guidance on how to comply with the AI Act’s transparency rules:

 The Code of Practice on marking and labelling of AI-generated content selected by the AI Office. The code will be a voluntary tool to guide providers and deployers of generative AI systems to comply with transparency obligations. These include marking AI generated content and disclosing the artificial nature of images, and audio (including deepfakes) as well as text.

 The Guidelines on transparent AI systems to clarify the scope of application, relevant legal definitions, the transparency obligations, the exceptions and related horizontal issues.

 These support instruments are under preparation and will be published in the second quarter of 2026. Find out more about how the AI Office is supporting the implementation of the AI Act .

 Governance and implementation

 The  European AI Office and authorities of the Member States are responsible for implementing, supervising and enforcing the AI Act. The AI Board, the Scientific Panel and the Advisory Forum steer and advise the AI Act’s governance. Find out more details about the Governance and enforcement of the AI Act .  

 Application timeline

 The AI Act entered into force on 1 August 2024, and will be fully applicable 2 years later on 2 August 2026, with some exceptions:

 prohibited AI practices and AI literacy obligations entered into application from 2 February 2025

 the governance rules and the obligations for GPAI models became applicable on 2 August 2025

 the rules for high-risk AI systems - embedded into regulated products - have an extended transition period until 2 August 2028 (as a result of the political agreement on the proposal to simplify the AI Act – ' AI omnibus ')

 How the Commission is simplifying the AI Act implementation?

 The Digital Package on Simplification proposed amendments to simplify the AI Act implementation and ensure the rules remain clear, simple, and innovation-friendly. This legislative proposal (dubbed as the ' AI omnibus ') has been adopted on 19 November 2025 and a political agreement was reached on 7 May 2026.

 Following the political agreement, a clear implementation timeline is set for the rules governing high-risk AI systems :

 Rules for systems used in certain high-risk areas — including biometrics, critical infrastructure, education, employment, migration, asylum and border control — will apply from 2 December 2027 .

 For systems integrated into products such as lifts or toys, the rules will apply from 2 August 2028 .

 This ensures the rules apply when companies have the right support tools to facilitate implementation, such as standards.

 In addition, the following amendments to the AI Act have been agreed:

 Prohibition of AI systems that generate non-consensual sexually explicit and intimate content or child sexual abuse material, such as AI ‘nudification' apps

 Reinforce the AI Office’s powers and centralise oversight of AI systems built on general-purpose AI models, reducing governance fragmentation

 Extend certain simplified requirements granted to small and medium-sized enterprises are extended to small mid-cap companies (SMEs and SMCs), including simplified technical documentation requirements

 More innovators will gain access to regulatory sandboxes , including an EU-level sandbox, to test their AI solutions in real-world conditions

 The interplay between the AI Act and EU product safety laws , in particular the Machinery Regulation, is clarified, avoiding duplication between sectoral and AI rules.

 All this complements AI Office actions already in place to provide clarity for businesses and national authorities. For instance, through guidelines, codes of practice, and the AI Act Service Desk .

 Quick links

 Any question on the AI Act? Visit our Single Information Platform 

 Text of the AI Act in all EU official languages 

 AI Pact 

 General-Purpose AI (GPAI) code of practice 

 Impact assessment of the regulation 

 Study supporting the impact assessment 

 Questions & Answers on the AI Act 

 European AI Office 

 Governance and enforcement of the AI Act 

 Upcoming guidelines on the AI Act 

 Standardisation of the AI Act 

 Latest News

 DIGIBYTE 
 | 08 June 2026 

 European Commission welcomes G7 cybersecurity declaration to strengthen global digital resilience 

 PRESS RELEASE 
 | 03 June 2026 

 Commission proposes tech sovereignty package to strengthen Europe's digital autonomy and resilience 

 PRESS RELEASE 
 | 01 June 2026 

 AI Act enforcement gets independent expert support 

 PRESS RELEASE 
 | 19 May 2026 

 Commission seeks feedback on the draft guidelines for the classification of high-risk artificial intelligence systems 

 DIGIBYTE 
 | 12 May 2026 

 Children’s protection online is high priority for 92% of Europeans 

 PRESS RELEASE 
 | 08 May 2026 

 Commission opens consultation on draft guidelines for AI transparency obligations 

 Browse Artificial intelligence 

 Policy and legislation

 03-06-2026
 Proposal for the Cloud and AI Development Act (CADA) 

 03-06-2026
 Communication on European Tech Sovereignty, accompanied by an EU Open Source Strategy 

 22-05-2026
 Report on the review of prohibitions and high-risk AI 

 More 

 Report / Study

 19-05-2026
 European Commission and OECD collaborate on monitoring national AI strategies and AI investments 

 08-05-2026
 Three studies on various aspects of article 5 of the AI Act 

 08-05-2026
 Three studies on technical solutions to mark and detect AI-generated content 

 More 

 Factsheet / infographic

 08-10-2025
 The Commission internal use of Artificial Intelligence 

 05-06-2025
 Factsheet on the International Digital Strategy for the European Union 

 05-04-2024
 Factsheet: EU-US Trade and Technology Council (2021-2024) 

 More 

 Brochure

 22-12-2025
 The rise of the intelligent edge – Insights into MetaOS 

 04-02-2025
 Living repository to foster learning and exchange on AI literacy 

 04-03-2024
 Horizon Europe: new projects in AI, Data and Robotics - 2024 Edition 

 More 

 Related Content

 Big Picture

 European approach to artificial intelligence

 The EU’s approach to artificial intelligence promotes excellence and trust, by boosting research and industrial capacity while ensuring safety and fundamental rights.

 Dig deeper

 Governance and enforcement of the AI Act 
 The European AI Office and the national market surveillance authorities are responsible for...

 AI talent, skills and literacy 
 The Commission aims to increase the number of AI experts by training and attracting more researchers...

 Standardisation of the AI Act 
 Harmonised standards will offer legal certainty under the AI Act, support innovation, and position...

 AI Act Whistleblower Tool 
 The AI Act Whistleblower Tool, empowers individuals to securely submit a report and contribute...

 Last update

 11 May 2026

 Print as PDF 

 Shaping Europe’s digital future 
 This site is managed by:
Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
 Digital EU on Mastodon 
 Digital EU on LinkedIn 
 Digital EU on Facebook 
 Digital EU on Youtube 
 Digital EU on Instagram 
 Digital EU on X 

 Contact us 
 Contact DG CONNECT 

 About us 
 Privacy statement 
 Copyright notice 
 About Directorate-General CONNECT 
 Language Policy 
 Accessibility statement 

 Follow the European Commission
 Mastodon 
 LinkedIn 
 Bluesky 
 Facebook 
 Youtube 
 Other 

 Contact us 

 Report an IT vulnerability 
 Languages on our websites 
 Cookies 
 Privacy policy 
 Legal notice 
 Accessibility