Electricity market design 

 Skip to main content 

 en Select your language
 Close 
 bg български 
 es español 
 cs čeština 
 da dansk 
 de Deutsch 
 et eesti 
 el ελληνικά 
 en English 
 fr français 
 ga Gaeilge 
 hr hrvatski 
 it italiano 
 lv latviešu 
 lt lietuvių 
 hu magyar 
 mt Malti 
 nl Nederlands 
 pl polski 
 pt português 
 ro română 
 sk slovenčina 
 sl slovenščina 
 fi suomi 
 sv svenska 

 Search 
 Search 

 Energy, Climate change, Environment 

 Energy

 Menu Close Menu
 Back Previous items Next items Home 
 Topics 
 Strategy Affordable energy 
 AccelerateEU to strengthen EU energy resilience 
 REPowerEU – phase out of Russian energy imports 
 Energy union 
 EU competitiveness and energy 
 Energy and the Green Deal 
 Equality platform for the energy sector 
 See all 

 Data and analysis Weekly Oil Bulletin 
 Market analysis 
 Energy prices and costs in Europe 
 Energy modelling 
 EU energy statistical pocketbook and country datasheets 
 Energy union indicators webtool 
 Eurobarometers on energy 
 See all 

 Energy explained Articles on energy themes 
 Energy fact pages 
 Recent videos on energy policy 
 People with energy 
 Educational videos and a quiz 
 See all 

 Resources Publications 
 Consultations 
 Final studies 
 Preparatory studies 
 See all 

 Events 
 News 

 Home 
 … 
 Topics 
 Markets and consumers 
 Electricity market design 
 Electricity market design 
 The EU electricity market aims at incentivising the clean energy transition and delivering energy security. It helps ensure affordability by boosting competition, improving the long-term markets and allowing consumers to choose energy suppliers.

 Page contents

 Page contents 

 We use electricity every day, yet often take for granted the systems that deliver it to us. The European electricity market is the largest integrated electricity market in the world. 11.3 million km of electricity lines and cables across the EU alone, enough to encircle the Earth 282 times, bring electricity to 266 million customers.

 An integrated EU energy market is the most cost-effective way to ensure secure, sustainable and affordable energy supplies to EU citizens. Common energy market rules and cross-border infrastructure allows energy to be produced in one EU country and delivered in another. The EU internal energy market saves consumers €34 billion annually and with deeper integration, this could rise to €40-43 billion by 2030. A Commission ‘White Paper’ on deeper electricity market integration is due for publication in early 2026.

 EU electricity market

 The share of electricity produced by renewable energy sources, predominantly solar and wind, is expected to grow from 37% in 2020 to more than 60% by 2030. In 2024, renewables made up 47.5% of EU’s gross electricity consumption , according to Eurostat. At the same time, electricity must also be produced and delivered in sufficient quantities when there is no wind or sun.
 Markets need to adapt to better integrate renewable energies and attract investment in fossil-free flexible technologies that can complement variable energy production, such as demand side response and  energy storage . They must also provide the right incentives for consumers to become more active and contribute to keeping the electricity system stable. 
 The EU electricity market needs to be transparent and efficiently monitored to ensure open and fair competition and protect against market abuse and manipulation. 2022 saw high and volatile energy prices and serious concerns about security of supply and EU heads of government called on the Commission to work swiftly on the structural reform of the electricity market to help Europe secure its energy sovereignty and achieve climate neutrality.
 Reform of the electricity market design

 To boost renewables, better protect consumers and enhance industrial competitiveness, the Commission proposed a reform of the existing electricity market rules in March 2023, as part of the  Green Deal Industrial Plan . 
 The new electricity market design rules entered into force on 16 July 2024:
 the  amending Directive EU/2024/1711 
 the  amending Regulation EU/2024/1747 

 © AdobeStock/wb77

 To support the implementation of the electricity market design reform, as well as the revised Renewable Energy Directive and the Affordable Energy Action Plan, the Commission published, on 2 July 2025, a recommendation and 3 guidance documents for EU countries. 
 Reform objectives
 The revised rules aim to make the EU energy market more resilient and the energy bills of European consumers and companies more independent from the short-term market price of electricity. This can be achieved by using long-term contracts, such as power purchase agreements and structuring investment support with 2-way contracts for difference.

 The reform will also help accelerate the deployment and integration of more renewable energy sources in the energy system, and enhance protection against market manipulation, promoting the stability and predictability of energy prices and thereby contributing to the competitiveness of EU industry.
 This will be achieved by introducing a new enforcement regime with an enhanced role for the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) in cross-border investigations, allowing it to pursue important cross-border cases with the most significant impact on the markets. 
 The reform will also enhance the supervision of reporting parties and data sharing between relevant authorities, increase market transparency through a liquified natural gas (LNG) price assessment and benchmark and ensure more effective enforcement towards non-EU companies, who will have to designate a representative in the EU.

 The new rules amend the following pieces of EU legislation

 Electricity Directive and Electricity Regulation The  Directive on common rules for the internal market for electricity  (EU/2019/944) and the  Regulation on the internal market for electricity  (EU/2019/943) put the consumer at the centre of the clean energy transition, enabling active participation, with a strong framework for consumer protection. The rules allow more flexibility to accommodate the increasing share of renewable energy in the grid and contribute to the creation of green jobs and growth.

 The ACER Regulation Regulation (EC/713/2009) established the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER), and it was recast with Regulation (EU) 2019/942 as part of the Clean energy for all Europeans package. 
 ACER acts as an independent body to foster the integration and completion of the European internal energy market for electricity and natural gas. The agency’s tasks include, among others, the coordination of actions of national energy regulators at European level (including taking binding decisions in case national regulators cannot agree), the development of common network and market rules, the participation in regional and cross-regional initiatives, the monitoring of market activities (including supervision to combat market manipulation to the detriment of other market participants and consumers), or advice to the EU Institutions on trans-European energy infrastructure development or security of supply.

 REMIT Regulation The  Wholesale Energy Market Integrity and Transparency (REMIT) Regulation (EU/1227/2011) ensures that consumers and other market participants can have confidence in the integrity of electricity and natural gas markets, that prices are fair and competitive based on supply and demand, and that no profits can be drawn from market abuse.

 Revised Renewable Energy Directive The more flexible the energy system is, with generation that can rapidly turn on or off, storage that can absorb or put power onto the system, and responsive consumers who can increase or decrease their demand for power, the more stable prices can be and the more renewable energy the system can integrate. The Renewable Energy Directive (EU/2018/2001) was already amended by Directive (EU/2023/2413) which entered into force on 20 November 2023. 

 The  Regulation on risk preparedness in the electricity sector  (EU/2019/941) is also part of the EU electricity market design, but is not concerned by the reform. It requires EU countries to prepare plans for potential future electricity crises, putting the appropriate tools in place to prevent, prepare for and manage these situations. It also requires that EU countries - using common methods - identify all possible electricity crisis scenarios at national and regional levels and prepare risk preparedness plans based on these scenarios. Above all, this preparation requires EU countries to cooperate and coordinate in a spirit of solidarity. It also establishes a framework for more systematic monitoring of security of supply issues via the  Electricity Coordination Group .
 Process timeline

 17 January 2025
 Deadline for EU countries to transpose the rules into national law 

 16 July 2024
 Reform of electricity market design rules enter into force

 21 May 2024
 Adoption of the Electricity Market reform ( Directive (EU) 2024/1711  and  Regulation (EU) 2024/1747 ) 

 14 December 2023
 Provisional agreement on the electricity market design rules 

 16 November 2023
 Provisional agreement on REMIT 

 Show 2 more items 

 14 March 2023
 Proposal to revise the electricity market design rules and the Regulation on Wholesale Energy Market Integrity and Transparency  (REMIT)

 Market coupling
 Day ahead and intraday market coupling is a sophisticated approach that connects multiple electricity markets across geographical regions via the cooperation of power exchanges and transmission system operators to create a single, larger, integrated and more liquid marketplace. It allows electricity to flow seamlessly across borders, facilitating efficient resource allocation, fostering competition, reducing price discrepancies, and enhancing grid stability and energy security. 

 On 30 September 2025, the EU’s day-ahead electricity market moved from hourly to 15-minute trading intervals , as envisaged in the Electricity Regulation (EU/2019/943). The change means that electricity prices are calculated every 15 minutes, reflecting more accurately the expected electricity generation and demand in the electricity system. This finer granularity makes Europe’s electricity system more flexible, reliable and ready to integrate the growing share of variable renewable energy sources. 

 Energy pricing models

 As in other sectors, the EU electricity market includes a number of different players in the supply chain – from producers to suppliers, to end-consumers - with wholesale prices at one end of the supply chain and end-user prices at the other.
 The wholesale market in the EU is a system of marginal pricing, also known as a  pay-as-clear market , where all electricity generators get the same price for the power they are selling at a given moment. Electricity producers (from national utilities to individuals who generate their own renewable energy and sell into the grid) bid into the market: they establish their price according to their production cost. Renewable energy sources are produced at zero cost and are therefore by definition always the cheapest. The bidding goes from the cheapest to the most expensive energy source. The cheapest electricity is bought first, next offers in line follow. Once the full demand is satisfied, everybody obtains the price of the last producer from which electricity was bought.
 This model provides efficiency, transparency and incentives to keep costs as low as possible. There is general consensus that the marginal model is the most efficient for liberalised electricity markets. In fact, it was used by most EU countries before being anchored in EU legislation.
 The alternative would not provide cheaper prices. In the  pay-as-bid model , producers (including cheap renewables) would simply bid at the price they expect the market to clear, not at zero or at their generation costs.
 Overall, it is better for consumers to have a transparent model that reveals the true costs of energy and provides incentives for individuals to become active in generating their own electricity.
 Related links

 Press material 2/10/2025: EU electricity trading in the day-ahead markets becomes more dynamic 
 2/7/2025: Commission continues action to lower energy bills with new guidance on renewables, grids infrastructure and network tariffs 
 17/1/2025: Electricity Market Design: Deadline for transposing new rules into national law 
 21/5/2024: European consumers and industry to benefit from clean, secure and stable energy supplies with key market reforms now adopted , Questions and Answers on the revised electricity market design 
 14/3/2023: Press release, Questions & Answers, Factsheet: Commission proposes reform of the EU electricity market design to boost renewables, better protect consumers and enhance industrial competitiveness 
 23/1/2023: Electricity Market Design: Commission launches consultation on reform to support a clean and affordable energy transition 

 Electricity Market reform ( Directive (EU) 2024/1711  and  Regulation (EU) 2024/1747 )
 Proposal on the revision of the electricity market design and REMIT (COM/2023/148)
 Proposal on the revision of EU’s protection against market manipulation in the wholesale energy market rules (COM/2023/147)
 Study: The future electricity intraday market design (February 2019)
 Regulation on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector (EU/2019/941)
 Regulation establishing a European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (EU/2019/942)
 Regulation on the internal market for electricity (EU/2019/943)
 Directive on common rules for the internal market for electricity (EU/2019/944)
 Regulation on wholesale energy market integrity and transparency  (EU/1227/2011)

 Share this page

 Energy 
 This site is managed by:
Directorate-General for Energy
 X 
 LinkedIn 
 Youtube 
 DG Energy newsletters 

 Contact us 
 Contact 

 About us 
 Directorate-General for Energy 

 More information on: 
 Energy, Climate change, Environment 

 Related links 
 Energy policy related web sites 

 Follow the European Commission
 Mastodon 
 LinkedIn 
 Bluesky 
 Facebook 
 Youtube 
 Other 

 Contact us 

 Report an IT vulnerability 
 Languages on our websites 
 Cookies 
 Privacy policy 
 Legal notice 
 Accessibility